Worldviews

Worldviews
An Introduction to the History
and Philosophy of Science

Third Edition

Richard DeWitt

This edition ﬁrst published 2018
 2018 Richard DeWitt
Edition History: 1e: Blackwell Publishing Ltd, (1e, 2003); John Wiley & Sons Ltd, (2e, 2010)
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material from
this title is available at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
The right of Richard DeWitt to be identiﬁed as the author of this work has been asserted in
accordance with law.
Registered Ofﬁces
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial Ofﬁce
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial ofﬁces, customer services, and more information about Wiley
products visit us at www.wiley.com.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some
content that appears in standard print versions of this book may not be available in other formats.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty
While the publisher and authors have used their best efforts in preparing this work, they make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this
work and speciﬁcally disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of
merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives, written sales materials or promotional statements for this work. The fact that an
organization, website, or product is referred to in this work as a citation and/or potential source of
further information does not mean that the publisher and authors endorse the information or
services the organization, website, or product may provide or recommendations it may make. This
work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional
services. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You
should consult with a specialist where appropriate. Further, readers should be aware that websites
listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when
it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any other
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other
damages.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: DeWitt, Richard, author.
Title: Worldviews : an introduction to the history and philosophy of science
/ Richard DeWitt.
Other titles: World views
Description: Third edition. | Hoboken : Wiley, 2018. | Includes
bibliographical references and index. |
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2017049915 (print) | LCCN 2017059375 (ebook) | ISBN
9781119118985 (pdf) | ISBN 9781119118992 (epub) | ISBN 9781119118893 (pbk.)
Subjects: LCSH: Science–History. | Science–Philosophy.
Classiﬁcation: LCC Q125 (ebook) | LCC Q125 .D38 2018 (print) | DDC 509–dc23 LC record
available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017049915
Cover images: (Vitruvian Man by Leonardo da Vinci)  Vaara / iStockphoto; (Night Sky)
 Misha Kaminsky / iStockphoto
Cover design by Wiley
Set in 10/12pt WarnockPro-Regular by Thomson Digital, Noida, India
Printed in Great Britain by TJ International Ltd, Padstow, Cornwall
1 2018

For Susie

vii

Table of Contents
List of Figures xv
Acknowledgments xix

Introduction

1

Part I: Fundamental Issues
1

2

3

5

7
Aristotle’s Beliefs and the Aristotelian Worldview
Aristotle’s beliefs 8
The Aristotelian worldview 12
The Newtonian Worldview 12
Concluding Remarks 13
Evidence 13
Common sense 14
Worldviews

7

Truth 17
Preliminary Issues 17
Clarifying the Question 18
Correspondence Theories of Truth 19
Coherence Theories of Truth 20
Different versions of coherence theories 20
Problems/Puzzles about Correspondence Theories of Truth
Assessing the accuracy of representations 23
The Total Recall scenario 24
A word of caution 26
Problems/Puzzles for Coherence Theories of Truth 26
Philosophical Reﬂections: Descartes and the Cogito 28
Concluding Remarks 29
Empirical Facts and Philosophical/Conceptual Facts

Preliminary Observations 31
A Note on Terminology 34
Concluding Remarks 34

31

22

viii

Table of Contents

4

Conﬁrming and Disconﬁrming Evidence and Reasoning

Conﬁrmation Reasoning 36
Disconﬁrmation Reasoning 37
Inductive and Deductive Reasoning
Concluding Remarks 42
5

37

The Quine–Duhem Thesis and Implications for Scientiﬁc Method

The Quine–Duhem Thesis 43
Bodies of beliefs and the tribunal of experience
Crucial experiments 45
The underdetermination of theories 46
Implications for Scientiﬁc Method 47
Aristotle’s axiomatic approach 48
Descartes’ axiomatic approach 51
Popper’s falsiﬁcationism 51
The hypothetico-deductive method 52
Concluding Remarks 53
6

36

43

44

A Philosophical Interlude: Problems and Puzzles of Induction

54

Hume’s Problem of Induction 54
Hempel’s Raven Paradox 57
Goodman’s Gruesome Problem 59
Concluding Remarks 60
61
Basic Ideas 61
Complicating Factors 62
Concluding Remarks 64

7

Falsiﬁability

8

Instrumentalism and Realism 66
Prediction and Explanation 66
Instrumentalism and Realism 67
Concluding Remarks 70

Part II:

9

The Transition from the Aristotelian Worldview to the Newtonian
Worldview 73

The Structure of the Universe on the Aristotelian Worldview

75

The Physical Structure of the Universe 75
Conceptual Beliefs about the Universe 77
Concluding Remarks 80
10 The Preface to Ptolemy’s Almagest: The Earth as Spherical, Stationary, and at
the Center of the Universe 81

The Earth as Spherical 82
The Earth as Stationary 84

Table of Contents

Common-sense arguments 84
The argument from objects in motion 86
The argument from stellar parallax 88
The Earth as the Center of the Universe 90
Concluding Remarks 91
11 Astronomical Data: The Empirical Facts

92

The Movement of the Stars 93
The Movement of the Sun 94
The Movement of the Moon 95
The Movement of the Planets 95
Concluding Remarks 98
99
A Scientiﬁc Problem with the Motion of the Heavenly Bodies
Three cautionary notes 102
Could This Account Be Used for a Moving Earth? 103
Concluding Remarks 104

12 Astronomical Data: The Philosophical/Conceptual Facts

99

106
Background Information 106
A Brief Description of the Components of Ptolemy’s Treatment of
Mars 107
The Rationale behind These Components 108
Concluding Remarks 114

13 The Ptolemaic System

115
Background Information 115
Overview of the Copernican System 116
Comparison of the Ptolemaic and Copernican Systems 117
Respecting the facts 117
Complexity 118
Retrograde motion and other more “natural” explanations 118
From a realist standpoint, which system is the more plausible model of
the universe? 120
What Motivated Copernicus? 121
Neoplatonism 121
Copernicus’ commitment to uniform, circular movement 122
The Reception of the Copernican Theory 123
Concluding Remarks 124

14 The Copernican System

15 The Tychonic System

125

128
Background Information 128
Tycho Brahe’s empirical observations
Tycho and Kepler 129
Kepler’s System 130

16 Kepler’s System

128

ix

x

Table of Contents

What Motivated Kepler? 131
Kepler’s desire to read the mind of God
Concluding Remarks 136

132

138
Background Information 138
Galileo and the Catholic church 138
A note on the nature of the evidence from the telescope
Galileo’s Evidence from the Telescope 141
Mountains on the moon 141
Sunspots 142
The rings, or “ears,” of Saturn 142
The moons of Jupiter 143
The phases of Venus 144
The stars 148
The Reception of Galileo’s Discoveries 148
Falsiﬁability issues 149
Concluding Remarks 152

17 Galileo and the Evidence from the Telescope

18 A Summary of Problems Facing the Aristotelian Worldview

Problems for the Aristotelian Worldview
The Need for a New Science 157
Concluding Remarks 157
A word of caution 158

139

154

154

19 Philosophical and Conceptual Connections in the Development
of the New Science 159

The Size of the Universe 159
Concluding Remarks 162
164
The New Science 164
The three laws of motion 165
Universal gravitation 165
Overview of the Newtonian Worldview 166
Philosophical Reﬂections: Instrumentalist and Realist Attitudes
Toward Newton’s Concept of Gravity 168
Concluding Remarks 170

20 Overview of the New Science and the Newtonian Worldview

171
Scientiﬁc Laws 171
Common features associated with scientiﬁc laws 172
Exceptionless regularities 174
Counterfactuals 174
Context dependence 176
Ceteris paribus clauses 177
Concluding Remarks 178

21 Philosophical Interlude: What Is a Scientiﬁc Law?

Table of Contents

179

22 The Development of the Newtonian Worldview, 1700–1900

Remarks on the Development of the Major Branches of
Science, 1700–1900 179
Chemistry 180
Biology 181
Electromagnetic theory 182
General comments 184
Minor Clouds 184
The Michelson–Morley experiment 184
Black body radiation 187
Other issues 188
Concluding Remarks 190

191

Part III: Recent Developments In Science and Worldviews

193
Absolute Space and Absolute Time 193
Overview of the Special Theory of Relativity 195
The Irresistible Why Question 201
Is Special Relativity Self-Contradictory? 201
What about their disagreements on what the other clocks
read? 204
From Joe’s point of view 205
From Sara’s point of view 205
Spacetime, Invariants, and the Geometrical Approach to
Relativity 206
Concluding Remarks 210

23 The Special Theory of Relativity

211
Basic Principles 211
The Einstein Field Equations and Predictions of General
Relativity 213
Philosophical Reﬂections: General Relativity and Gravity
Concluding Remarks 218

24 The General Theory of Relativity

217

25 Philosophical Interlude: Are (Some) Scientiﬁc Theories
Incommensurable? 219

Preliminary Considerations 219
Exploring Incommensurability 221
Terminological incommensurability 222
Methodological incommensurability 224
Different worlds incommensurability 226
Discussion: Incommensurability and Scientiﬁc Progress
Concluding Remarks 229

227

xi

xii

Table of Contents

26 Introduction to Quantum Theory: Basic Empirical Facts and the
Mathematics of Quantum Theory 230

Facts, Theory, and Interpretation 230
The quantum facts 231
Quantum theory itself 231
Interpretations of quantum theory 232
Some Quantum Facts 232
A brief excursion into a reality issue 233
Four experiments 235
Overview of the Mathematics of Quantum Theory 239
Descriptive overview of the mathematics of quantum theory 239
If the mathematics of quantum theory is a familiar sort of wave
mathematics, why do we often hear that quantum theory is such an
unusual theory? 240
A somewhat more detailed, but still descriptive, overview of the
mathematics of quantum theory 242
The evolution of states over time 247
Concluding Remarks 247
27 The Reality Question: The Measurement Problem and Interpretations of
Quantum Theory 248

The Measurement Problem 248
What is a measurement? 248
The role of measurement in Newtonian science 250
The role of measurement in quantum theory 250
Schrödinger’s cat 253
The Measurement Problem 255
Subjectivity vs. objectivity 255
Measurement contexts vs. nonmeasurement contexts 256
System vs. apparatus; macroscopic vs. microscopic
levels 256
Universality 257
Concluding thoughts on the measurement problem 258
Interpretations of Quantum Theory 258
Collapse interpretations 259
Mild measurement-dependent reality 261
Moderate measurement-dependent reality 262
Radical measurement-dependent reality (consciousness-dependent
reality) 262
Non-collapse interpretations 263
Einstein’s realism 263
Bohm’s realism 265
The many-worlds interpretation 267
Observations on the interpretations of quantum theory 268
Concluding Remarks 271

Table of Contents

28 Quantum Theory and Locality: EPR, Bell’s Theorem, and the Aspect
Experiments 272

Background Information 272
The EPR Thought Experiment 273
The argument for (1) 275
Bell’s Theorem 276
Aspect’s Experiments 280
Locality, Nonlocality, and Spooky Action at a Distance 281
Concluding Remarks 285
286
Overview of the Basics of Evolutionary Theory 286
Darwin’s and Wallace’s discovery: Evolution by natural selection 286
A brief overview of evolutionary theory since Darwin and Wallace 288
A word of caution 292
Darwin’s and Wallace’s Paths to Natural Selection 293
The development of Darwin’s views 293
The development of Wallace’s views 296
Darwin’s On the Origin of Species 297
The reception of the Origin of Species 299
Concluding Remarks 299

29 Overview of the Theory of Evolution

300
Implications for Religion 300
Dennett, Dawkins, Weinberg, and others: “no” 301
Haught, process philosophy, and process theology 302
Discussion 305
Morality and Ethics 307
Empirical Studies 310
The iterated prisoner’s dilemma 310
The ultimatum game 313
Additional notes on cooperation and altruism 315
The trust game 316
Concluding Remarks 318

30 Reﬂections on Evolution

320
Overview 320
Reﬂections on Relativity Theory 322
Reﬂections on Quantum Theory 324
Reﬂections on Evolutionary Theory 325
Metaphors 326

31 Worldviews: Concluding Thoughts

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading
References 349
Index 357

329

xiii

xv

List of Figures
1.1

A “grocery list” of Aristotle’s beliefs

9

1.2

Aristotle’s “jigsaw puzzle” of beliefs

10

2.1

A peek into Sara’s consciousness

2.2

Sara’s conscious experience

2.3

The Total Recall scenario

5.1

Illustration of Euclidean axiom

8.1

Mars’ motion on the Ptolemaic system

10.1

Does the ball follow this path?

10.2

Or does the ball follow this path?

13.1

Treatment of Mars on the Ptolemaic system

13.2

The ﬂexibility of epicycle–deferent systems

13.3

Position of Mars against the backdrop of the ﬁxed stars

13.4

Explanation of retrograde motion on the Ptolemaic system

13.5

Minor and major epicycles

14.1

The treatment of Mars on the Copernican system

14.2

Explanation of retrograde motion on the Copernican system

15.1

The Tychonic system

16.1

An ellipse

16.2

Orbit of Mars on Kepler’s system

131

16.3

Illustration of Kepler’s second law

131

16.4

Nested sphere, cube, and sphere

16.5

Kepler’s construction

16.6

Kepler’s construction with the solids removed

22

24
25
50
68

87
87
108
109
110
111

112

126

130

133

134
135

117
119

xvi

List of Figures

17.1

“Photograph” of sun and planets

17.2

Sun-centered interpretation of “photograph”

17.3

Earth-centered interpretation of “photograph”

17.4

Phases of Venus

17.5

Phases of the moon

17.6

Sun, Venus, and Earth on the Ptolemaic system

17.7

Sun, Venus, and Earth on a sun-centered system

22.1

Boat and swimmer analogy

22.2

The swimmers return at different times

23.1

Illustration for special relativity

23.2

Snapshot A

202

23.3

Snapshot B

203

23.4

A typical Cartesian coordinate system

24.1

Magnetic ﬁeld lines

24.2

Typical ﬁeld lines in general relativity

26.1

Electrons as particles

26.2

Electrons as waves

26.3

The particle effect and the wave effect

26.4

Two slit experiment with electron detectors

26.5

Beam splitter experiment

26.6

Families of wave mathematics

26.7

Representation of a wave equation

26.8

Adding family members to produce a particular wave 243

26.9

Members of another family can produce the same wave

140
140
141

144
145
146
147

186
187

196

207

215
216

234

235
235
236

237
243
243

243

26.10 Representation of the wave function for an electron in a particular
setting 244
26.11 Families associated with measurements
26.12 Wave function for electron

245

246

26.13 Family P associated with measurements of position

246

26.14 Wave function decomposed into members of family P
27.1

Beam splitter arrangement

27.2

Schrödinger’s cat

254

251

246

List of Figures

28.1

A typical EPR setup

274

28.2

Coke machine analogy

277

28.3

Modiﬁed EPR scenario

279

29.1

Results of genetic drift simulation

290

30.1

Prisoner’s dilemma payoff matrix

311

30.2

Ultimatum game payoff matrix

30.3

Trust game payoff matrix

317

314

xvii

xix

Acknowledgments
Countless people made contributions to the various editions of this work. Some
contributions were large, some small, but all of them were important. For the
various editions I have received invaluable feedback from numerous anonymous
reviewers, sometimes catching outright mistakes and sometimes providing good
suggestions for clarifying discussions. Although I do not know who these
reviewers are, I would like to thank them for their important contributions.
From the time this book project began, when the manuscript existed only as a
rough draft, and continuing through drafts of the current edition, my philosophy
of science students have provided excellent feedback on which ideas worked and
which did not, which explanations were clear and which not so clear, and more.
There are too many of them to name, but I would like to thank them as a whole for
their help. I likewise cannot begin to name, but I do appreciate, all of the
colleagues who over the years have discussed these issues with me, read portions
of manuscripts, and helped me clarify and oftentimes correct my thinking on
various issues. I would like to note that in spring 2016 I had the honor of leading a
small group of exceptional students in a seminar in cognitive science and the
philosophy of mind. Together we thought through a variety of issues in current
science, history of science, and philosophy of science, and this group forced me to
expand upon, clarify, and sometimes rethink a variety of views related to the
history and philosophy of science. For this I’d like to acknowledge the contribu­
tions of Dan Boley, Chris Cardillo, Alex Clinton, Chris Fazekas, Aidan Grealish,
Tom Greenwood, Tess McMahon, Elliot Neski, Justin Paton, Kali Schlegel,
Andrew Schmidt, and John Simon. I would like again to note the contributions
of Charles Ess of the University of Oslo, and Marc Lange of the University of
North Carolina-Chapel Hill, both of whom read drafts of the entire ﬁrst edition,
most of which is included in both the second edition and this edition. Each
provided lengthy, detailed, and helpful comments and suggestions (not to
mention saving me from several embarrassing mistakes). In addition, I’d like
to thank Todd Disotell and Shara Bailey of the Center for the Study of Human
Origins, New York University, for an invigorating 2009 seminar on evolution, and
the Faculty Resource Network for their ﬁnancial support for that seminar.
Regarding the material on evolution, I would like to acknowledge Richard Gawne,
whose observations were largely responsible for me rethinking the way that
material was presented in the previous edition. I wish also to recognize Helen
Lang, who unfortunately passed away not long ago. Conversations with her were

xx

Acknowledgments

exceptionally valuable in helping me clarify certain aspects of Aristotle’s physics
and general philosophy of nature. Thanks also to Giles Flitney for his excellent
work as copy-editor for this latest edition. Finally, I would again like to thank my
original editor on this project, Jeff Dean, whose feedback was invaluable in the
original organization and presentation of this manuscript.
RD

1

Introduction
This book is intended primarily for those coming to the history and philosophy of
science for the ﬁrst time. If this description ﬁts you, welcome to a fascinating
territory to explore. This ﬁeld involves some of the deepest, most difﬁcult, and
most fundamental questions there are. But at the same time, the “lens of science,”
so to speak, focuses these questions more sharply than they are often otherwise
focused. I hope you enjoy this ﬁeld as much as I do, and I especially hope your
appetite is whetted to the point where you will want to return to explore these
subjects in more depth.
This sort of introductory work provides special challenges. On the one hand, I
want to be accurate with the history, the philosophy, and the interconnections
between the two. On the other hand, I want to avoid the level of detail and
minutiae that might swamp one approaching this subject for the ﬁrst time. Those
of us who do history and philosophy of science full-time – most of us are
academics – tend to get caught up in the details of our disciplines, and I think we
often lose sight of what such detail must look like to one new to the subject. When
faced with these minutiae, newcomers often come away with the sense “Why
would anyone care about that?”
The question is an understandable one. The details and minutiae are impor­
tant, but their importance can only be understood in the context of a broader
picture. So I hope, in this text, to paint one such broader picture. But although this
text provides a rather broad-brushstroke picture, to the best of my knowledge
what I say is accurate, though it admittedly leaves out a good deal of detail.
The connections between history, science, and philosophy are endlessly
complex and fascinating. As mentioned, I hope to whet your appetite, to
make you want to explore these issues in more detail, and perhaps even come
to appreciate and enjoy the minutiae. Nothing would please me more than if, at
the end of this book, you visit your bookstore, or ﬁre up your web browser, and
order works that will enable you to explore these topics further.

Notes on the Third Edition
Since this new edition contains a fair amount of new material, some brief notes
on these additions are in order. Various scientiﬁc traditions (Aristotelian,
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

2

Introduction

Newtonian, current sciences) have always been a central theme in the book,
and given this, questions surrounding the possible incommensurability of
such scientiﬁc traditions (roughly, the question of whether one tradition can
be properly understood from the point of view of a different tradition)
have always been sort of lurking in the background of previous editions. For
this edition, and following the suggestions of several reviewers of earlier
editions, I’ve added a chapter explicitly discussing issues surrounding
incommensurability. This chapter comes relatively late in the book (Chapter
25), which allows the discussion to use, as examples, scientiﬁc traditions
discussed earlier in the book.
In addition, I’ve added a chapter on the measurement problem in quantum
theory. The measurement problem is widely viewed as a major (perhaps
the major) issue with the standard approach to quantum theory (at least,
quantum theory taken realistically). Most, perhaps all, of the discussions of the
measurement problem I am familiar with are not geared toward someone who
might be encountering these topics for the ﬁrst time. For this chapter, I took
pains to try to describe the measurement problem, especially why it is a
problem, in a way that will work for someone who has not encountered
such issues before.
Regarding evolutionary theory: since the publication of the second edition, I’ve
become less than happy with the way I presented the basics of evolutionary theory
in that edition. It’s not that what was said was mistaken; rather, I think it was
overly simplistic. For this edition, I took the previous material, tossed it in the bin,
and started from scratch. So while the title of the chapter is the same, the material
on the basics of evolutionary theory is entirely new, and substantially more
extensive than what was in the second edition. I think it works much better. (The
historical material toward the end of that chapter, on Darwin’s and Wallace’s
routes to discovering natural selection, has been cleaned up and condensed, but is
basically the same.)
I might note that I do not anticipate there being another edition beyond
this one. The main reasons are (i) practical considerations mean that books of
this sort can only be so long, and with this edition we are at the point where it
would be difﬁcult to add new material without exceeding these practical
limits, and (ii) I do not believe in putting out new and only slightly modiﬁed
editions mainly aimed at killing off sales of previous editions. As such, for
this edition I’ve taken a good amount of time to carefully review every chapter.
For some chapters only minor changes were made, for example, rewriting
sentences for greater clarity. For other chapters I made much more substantial
changes.
Finally, for the chapters in the ﬁnal section concerning recent developments, I
have added references to some interesting experiments that have been conducted
since the publication of the second edition. Mainly these involve relativity (for
example, the recent detection of gravitational waves predicted by Einstein’s
general relativity), and recent experiments in quantum theory (for example,
involving further tests of Bell’s theorem).

Introduction

Suggested Primary Sources to Accompany the Book
Much of the material in the book can be usefully accompanied by primary
sources. A wide variety of additional primary sources could be used, and below is a
list, I think of manageable length, of primary sources I would recommend. All of
the sources below have the advantage of being available online, and from sources
in the public domain such that copyright issues do not arise.
Descartes’ Meditations I and II
Hume’s Enquiry, Section IV, Part II
Aristotle’s On the Heavens, Book II, Chapter 14
Osiander’s forward to Copernicus’ On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres
Letter from Schonberg to Copernicus (as included in Copernicus’ On the
Revolutions)
Galileo’s Letter to Castelli
Bellarmine’s Letter to Foscarini
Galileo’s Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina
The Inquisition’s Indictment of Galileo
The Inquisition’s Sentencing of Galileo
Galileo’s Abjuration
Einstein’s “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies”
Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen’s “Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of
Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?”
Bell’s “On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen Paradox”

A Note on the Structure of the Book
In the barest of outlines, my approach in this book is (i) to introduce some
fundamental issues in the history and philosophy of science; (ii) to explore the
transition from the Aristotelian worldview to the Newtonian worldview; and (iii)
to explore challenges to our own western worldview brought on by recent
developments, most notably relativity theory, quantum theory, and evolutionary
theory.
To accomplish these goals, the book is divided into three parts. Part I provides
an introduction to some fundamental issues in the history and philosophy of
science. Such issues include the notion of worldviews, scientiﬁc method and
reasoning, truth, evidence, the contrast between empirical facts and philosophi­
cal/conceptual facts, falsiﬁability, and instrumentalism and realism. The rele­
vance of and interconnections between these topics are illustrated throughout
Parts II and III.
In Part II, we explore the change from the Aristotelian worldview to the
Newtonian worldview, noting the role played by some of the philosophical/
conceptual issues involved in this change. Of particular interest is the role played
by certain philosophical/conceptual “facts” that are central to the Aristotelian

3

4

Introduction

worldview. Discussion of these beliefs serves to illustrate many of the issues from
Part I, and also sets the stage for the discussion, in Part III, of some of our own
philosophical/conceptual “facts” that we must abandon in light of recent
discoveries.
Part III provides an introduction to recent discoveries and developments, most
notably relativity theory, quantum theory, and evolutionary theory. As we explore
these, we will see that these new discoveries and developments require substantial
changes in some of the key beliefs that almost everyone in the western world was
raised with. And having emphasized, in Part II, the role played by philosophical/
conceptual beliefs in the Aristotelian worldview, we now see that some of the
beliefs we have long taken as obvious empirical facts turn out, in light of recent
developments, to be mistaken philosophical/conceptual “facts.”
At this point in time it is clear that changes in our overall view of the world will
be required as recognition of these mistaken philosophical/conceptual beliefs
becomes more widespread. It is difﬁcult to say at this point just what shape these
changes will take, but it is becoming increasingly likely that our grandchildren will
inherit a view of the world substantially different from our own. I hope you enjoy
exploring and thinking about not only the changes that have taken place in the
past, but also the changes we ﬁnd ourselves in the midst of.
At the end of the book, in the Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading, I provide
further information on some of the topics discussed, as well as suggestions for
where to ﬁnd additional information on these topics. As mentioned, nothing
would please me more than if, at the end of this work, you ﬁnd yourself interested
in further investigating these issues.
As a ﬁnal note on the structure of the book, although this book is intended to be
read as a whole, and its three main parts are connected in the ways described
above, it is possible to read Parts I, II, and III more or less independently of each
other. For example, those more interested in the scientiﬁc revolution of the 1600s
and the development of Newtonian science and the Newtonian worldview, and
less interested in related issues in the philosophy of science, could largely start
with Chapter 9, at the beginning of Part II. I would, however, encourage such
readers to take at least a quick pass through Chapters 1, 3, 4, and 8. Likewise,
readers interested primarily in more recent developments in science, especially
relativity theory, quantum theory, and evolutionary theory, could jump immedi­
ately to Chapter 23, at the beginning of Part III. I would encourage such readers to
take at least a quick look at Chapters 3 and 8.
Once again, I hope you enjoy your exploration.

5

Part I
Fundamental Issues
In Part I, we explore some preliminary and basic issues involved in the history and
philosophy of science. In particular, we will discuss the notion of worldviews,
truth, evidence, empirical facts versus philosophical/conceptual facts, common
types of reasoning, falsiﬁability, and instrumentalism and realism. These topics
provide the necessary background for our exploration, in Part II, of the transition
from the Aristotelian worldview to the Newtonian worldview, and also for our
exploration, in Part III, of recent developments that challenge our own view of
the world.

Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

7

1
Worldviews
The main goal of this chapter is to introduce the notion of a worldview. As with
most of the topics we will explore in this book, the notion of a worldview turns out
to be substantially more complex than it at ﬁrst appears. We will begin, though,
with a relatively straightforward characterization of this notion. Then as the book
progresses, and we come to appreciate more about the Aristotelian worldview and
about our own worldview, we will come to a better appreciation of some of the
complexities involved.
Although the term “worldview” has been used fairly widely for over 100 years, it
is not a term that carries a standard deﬁnition. So it is worth taking a moment to
clarify how I will be using the term. In the shortest of descriptions, I will use
“worldview” to refer to a system of beliefs that are interconnected in something
like the way the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle are interconnected. That is, a worldview
is not merely a collection of separate, independent, unrelated beliefs, but is instead
an intertwined, interrelated, interconnected system of beliefs.
Often, the best way to understand a new concept is by way of an example. With
this in mind, let’s begin with a look at the Aristotelian worldview.

Aristotle’s Beliefs and the Aristotelian Worldview
In the western world, what I am calling the Aristotelian worldview was the
dominant system of beliefs from about 300 BCE to about 1600 CE. This worldview
was based on a set of beliefs articulated most clearly and thoroughly by Aristotle
(384–322 BCE). It is worth noting that the term “Aristotelian worldview” refers not
so much to the collection of beliefs held speciﬁcally by Aristotle himself, but
rather to a set of beliefs shared by a large segment of western culture after his
death and that were, as noted, largely based on the beliefs of Aristotle.
To understand the Aristotelian worldview, it will be easier to begin with
Aristotle’s own beliefs. Following this, we will discuss some of the ways these
beliefs evolved in the centuries after the death of Aristotle.

Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

8

Fundamental Issues

Aristotle’s beliefs
Aristotle held a large number of beliefs that are radically different from the beliefs
we hold. Here are a few examples:
a) The Earth is located at the center of the universe.
b) The Earth is stationary, that is, it neither orbits any other body such as the
sun, nor spins on its axis.
c) The moon, the planets, and the sun revolve around the Earth, completing a
revolution about every 24 hours.
d) In the sublunar region, that is, the region between the Earth and the moon
(including the Earth itself) there are four basic elements, these being earth,
water, air, and ﬁre.
e) Objects in the superlunar region, that is, the region beyond the moon
including the moon, sun, planets, and stars, are composed of a ﬁfth basic
element, ether.
f) Each of the basic elements has an essential nature, and this essential nature is
the reason why the element behaves as it does.
g) The essential nature of each of the basic elements is reﬂected in the way that
element tends to move.
h) The element earth has a natural tendency to move toward the center of the
universe. (That’s why rocks fall straight down, since the center of the Earth is
the center of the universe.)
i) The element water also has a natural tendency to move toward the center of
the universe, but its tendency is not as strong as that of the earth element.
(That’s why, when dirt and water are mixed, both tend to move downward,
but the water will eventually end up above the dirt.)
j) The element air naturally moves toward a region that is above earth and
water, but below ﬁre. (That’s why air, when blown into water, bubbles up
through the water.)
k) The element ﬁre has a natural tendency to move away from the center of the
universe. (That’s why ﬁre burns upward, through air.)
l) The element ether, which composes objects such as the planets and stars, has
a natural tendency toward perfectly circular movement. (That’s why the
planets and stars continuously move in circles about the Earth, that is, about
the center of the universe.)
m) In the sublunar region, an object in motion will naturally tend to come to a
halt, either because the elements composing it have reached their natural
place in the universe, or far more often because something (for example, the
surface of the Earth) prevents them from continuing toward their natural
place.
n) An object that is stationary will remain stationary, unless there is some source
of motion (either self-motion, as when an object moves toward its natural
place in the universe, or an external source of motion, as when I push my pen
across my desk).
The beliefs just mentioned are only a small, small handful of Aristotle’s views.
He also had extensive views on ethics, politics, biology, psychology, the proper

1 Worldviews

method for conducting scientiﬁc investigations, and so on. Like most of us,
Aristotle held thousands of beliefs. But most of his beliefs were quite different
from ours.
Importantly, Aristotle’s beliefs were anything but a random collection of
beliefs. When I say that the beliefs were not random, part of what I mean is
that he had good reason to believe most of them, and the beliefs were far from
naive. Every single one of the beliefs listed above turned out to be wrong, but given
the data available at the time, every one of those beliefs was quite justiﬁed. To take
just one example, the best scientiﬁc data of Aristotle’s time strongly indicated that
the Earth was at the center of the universe. The belief turned out to be wrong, but
naive it was not.
By saying the beliefs were not random, I also mean that they form an
interrelated, interlocking system of beliefs. To illustrate the ways in which
Aristotle’s beliefs were interrelated and interlocking, consider a wrong way
and a right way of picturing them.
First, the wrong picture, which I will illustrate by an analogy with grocery lists.
When most of us make grocery lists, we end up with a haphazard collection of
items related only by the fact that we can, we hope, ﬁnd them when we get to the
grocery store. We could organize our grocery lists – with the dairy items in this
part of the list, the bakery items in that part, and so on – but most of us simply do
not bother. And the result, as mentioned, is a haphazard list with no particular
relation between the items on it.
When you think of Aristotle’s beliefs, do not think of them as like a grocery list
of unrelated items. That is, do not picture the collection of beliefs as like the
somewhat haphazard list in Figure 1.1. Instead, here is a better picture. Think of
the collection of beliefs as like a jigsaw puzzle. Each piece of the puzzle is a
particular belief, with the pieces ﬁtting together in a coherent, consistent,
Figure 1.1 A “grocery list” of
Aristotle’s beliefs.

9

10

Fundamental Issues

Figure 1.2 Aristotle’s “jigsaw puzzle” of beliefs.

interrelated, interlocking fashion, as the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle ﬁt together. That
is, picture Aristotle’s system of beliefs more as it appears in Figure 1.2.
The jigsaw puzzle metaphor illustrates the key features of the way I am using
the notion of a worldview. First, pieces of a jigsaw puzzle are not independent and
isolated; rather, puzzle pieces are interconnected. Each piece of a puzzle ﬁts with
the piece next to it, and that piece ﬁts with the pieces next to it, and so on. All the
pieces are interconnected and interrelated, and the overall result is a system in
which the individual pieces ﬁt together into an interlocking, interconnected,
coherent, and consistent whole.
Likewise, Aristotle’s beliefs ﬁt together, forming an interlocking, consistent
system. Each belief is closely tied with the beliefs around it, and those beliefs in
turn are closely tied to their surrounding beliefs, and so on.
To take just one example of how Aristotle’s beliefs ﬁt together, consider the
belief that the Earth is the center of the universe. This belief is closely
interconnected with the belief that the element earth has a natural tendency
to move toward the center of the universe. After all, the Earth itself is composed
primarily of the earthy element, so the belief that the earthy element naturally
goes toward the center of the universe, and the belief that the Earth itself is at
the center of the universe, ﬁt together nicely. Likewise, both of these beliefs are
closely tied to the belief that an object will only move if there is a source of
motion. Just as my pen will remain stationary unless something moves it, so too
with the Earth. Having long ago moved to the center of the universe, or as close
to the center as they could, the heavy elements comprising the Earth will now
remain stationary, because there is nothing powerful enough to move an object

1 Worldviews

as massive as the Earth. All of these beliefs are, in turn, closely connected to the
belief that the basic elements have essential natures, and the belief that objects
behave as they do largely because of their natures. Again, the general point is
that Aristotle’s beliefs are interconnected like the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle are
interconnected.
In addition, notice that in a jigsaw puzzle there are differences between the core
pieces of the puzzle and the peripheral pieces. Because of the interconnections, a
central, core piece cannot be replaced with a different-shaped piece without
replacing almost the entire puzzle. A piece near the periphery, however, can be
replaced with relatively little alteration in the rest of the puzzle.
In a similar vein, among Aristotle’s beliefs we can distinguish between core and
peripheral beliefs. Peripheral beliefs can be replaced without much alteration in
the overall worldview. For example, Aristotle believed there were ﬁve planets (not
counting the sun, moon, and Earth). Five planets are all that can be distinguished
without the technology of recent years. But had there arisen evidence, say, of a
sixth planet, Aristotle could easily have accommodated this new belief without
much alteration in his overall system of beliefs. This ability of a belief to change
without substantially altering the overall system of beliefs is typical of a peripheral
belief.
In contrast, consider the belief that the Earth was stationary and at the center of
the universe. In Aristotle’s system of beliefs, this is a core belief. Importantly, this
is a core belief not because of the depth of conviction Aristotle had in it, but rather
because, like a puzzle piece near the center, it cannot be removed and replaced
without dramatically altering the beliefs to which it is connected, which in turn
would require altering almost his entire system of beliefs.
To illustrate this, suppose Aristotle tried to take his belief that the Earth was the
center of the universe and replace it with, say, the belief that the sun was the
center. Could Aristotle simply remove this belief, this piece of the puzzle, and
replace it with a new belief that the sun is the center, and do so while still keeping
most of the rest of the jigsaw puzzle intact?
The answer is no, because the new belief, that the sun is the center of the
universe, would not ﬁt into the rest of the jigsaw puzzle. For example, heavy
objects clearly fall toward the center of the Earth. If the center of the Earth is not
the center of the universe, then Aristotle’s belief that heavy objects (those
composed mainly of the heavy elements earth and water) have a natural tendency
to move toward the center of the universe has to be replaced as well. This in turn
requires replacing a multitude of other interconnected beliefs, such as the belief
that objects have essential natures that cause them to behave as they do. In short,
trying to replace just the one belief requires replacement of all the beliefs to which
it is interconnected, and in general, it would require building an entirely new
jigsaw puzzle of beliefs.
Again, this is all to reinforce the idea that Aristotle’s beliefs were not a random,
haphazard collection of beliefs, but were rather an interconnected, jigsaw puzzlelike system of beliefs. This notion that individual beliefs ﬁt together to form an
interlocking, consistent system of beliefs is the key idea behind the way I will use
the notion of a worldview. In short, when I speak of a worldview, think of the
jigsaw puzzle analogy.

11

12

Fundamental Issues

The Aristotelian worldview
Thus far, we have primarily discussed Aristotle’s own beliefs, and one might get
the impression that a worldview involves a particular individual’s jigsaw puzzle of
beliefs. People do sometimes speak this way. There is a sense in which each of us
has a somewhat different system of beliefs, a slightly different worldview, from
everyone else. And our individual systems of beliefs, of course, are part of what
makes us the individuals we are.
But a more important sense of “worldview,” for this book, is a more generalized
notion. For example, much of the western world, from the death of Aristotle to the
1600s, shared a more or less Aristotelian way of looking at the world. This
certainly does not mean that everyone believed exactly what Aristotle did, or that
the system of beliefs was not added to or modiﬁed during this period.
For example, at various times during this period, Judaic, Christian, and
Islamic philosopher-theologians mixed Aristotelian beliefs with religious
beliefs, and these sorts of mixtures illustrate some of the ways in which
Aristotelian beliefs were modiﬁed in the centuries after his death. There
were also groups who took a distinctly non-Aristotelian view of the universe.
For example, there were groups whose beliefs were based more closely on the
ideas of Plato (428–348 BCE) rather than Aristotle, and such Platonic-based belief
systems provided an alternative to the Aristotelian worldview. (Plato, inciden­
tally, was Aristotle’s teacher, though Aristotle’s views would eventually diverge
substantially from those of Plato.)
In spite of such modiﬁcations to Aristotle’s beliefs, and in spite of the existence
of groups taking a non-Aristotelian view of the world, the belief systems of large
segments of the western world, from about 300 BCE to about 1600, were very much
in the Aristotelian spirit. The belief that the Earth was the center of the universe,
that objects had essential natures and natural tendencies, that the sublunar region
was a place of imperfection and the superlunar region a place of perfection, and so
on, were part of the consensus of most of the western world. And these group
beliefs ﬁt together much like the beliefs of an individual ﬁt together – into an
interlocking, consistent, coherent system of beliefs. And it is this group jigsaw
puzzle of beliefs, very much in the spirit of Aristotle’s beliefs, that I will have in
mind when I speak of the Aristotelian worldview.

The Newtonian Worldview
As an example to contrast with the Aristotelian worldview, let’s look brieﬂy at a
different system of beliefs. Early in the 1600s, new evidence (largely from the
newly invented telescope) arose that indicated the Earth moved about the sun. As
discussed above, one cannot simply replace the Earth-centered piece of the
Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle without replacing virtually all of the pieces of that
puzzle. As such, the Aristotelian worldview was no longer viable. The story is
fascinating and complex, and we will explore it more later in the book, but for
now, sufﬁce it to say that eventually a new system of beliefs emerged. And in
particular, the new system was one that included a belief in a moving Earth.

1 Worldviews

Call the worldview that eventually replaced the Aristotelian worldview the
Newtonian worldview. This worldview has as its foundation the work of Isaac
Newton (1642–1727) and his contemporaries, but it has been added to consid­
erably over the years. As with the Aristotelian view, the Newtonian worldview has
associated with it a large number of beliefs. Here are some examples:
a) The Earth revolves on its axis, completing a revolution approximately every
24 hours.
b) The Earth and planets move in elliptical orbits around the sun.
c) There are slightly more than 100 basic elements in the universe.
d) Objects behave as they do largely because of the inﬂuence of external forces.
(For example, gravity, which is why rocks fall.)
e) Objects such as planets and stars are composed of the same basic elements as
objects on Earth.
f) The same laws that describe the behavior of objects on Earth (for example,
that an object in motion tends to remain in motion) also apply to objects such
as planets and stars.
And so on for the other thousands of beliefs that compose the Newtonian
worldview.
This is the worldview that most of us in the western world have been
raised on. And the exact same story applies to the beliefs that compose the
Newtonian worldview as applies to the Aristotelian worldview. In particular,
the Newtonian worldview comprises a system of beliefs that tie together as the
pieces of a jigsaw puzzle tie together, forming a coherent, consistent, inter­
locking system of beliefs. While both systems of beliefs, the Aristotelian and the
Newtonian, are coherent and consistent, they are very different jigsaw puzzles,
with quite different core beliefs.
The change from the Aristotelian to the Newtonian worldview was a dramatic
change, and much of the story of Part II of this book involves this transition. As we
will see, this transition was spurred, in large part, by new discoveries in the early
1600s. Later, in Part III, we will explore some rather surprising recent discoveries.
In something like the way the new discoveries in the 1600s required a change in
the existing jigsaw puzzle of beliefs, so too the discoveries of recent decades
require a change in our jigsaw puzzle of beliefs.

Concluding Remarks
Before concluding this introduction to the notion of worldviews, I want to make
two quick observations. The ﬁrst deals with the evidence we have for the beliefs
that comprise our worldview, and the second concerns the apparent common­
sense nature of many of the beliefs comprising our worldview.
Evidence
We have been speaking a great deal about beliefs, and presumably, people have
reasons for holding the beliefs they do. That is, we would seem to have some sort
of evidence for the beliefs we hold.

13

14

Fundamental Issues

For example, presumably you believe Aristotle was wrong, and that the Earth is
not the center of the universe. Instead, you most likely believe that the sun is the
center of our solar system, and the Earth and other planets move around the sun. I
suspect you have good evidence for this belief. But I also suspect that your
evidence is not what you think it is. Pause for a few seconds and ask “Why do I
believe the Earth moves around the sun? What is the evidence I have?” Seriously,
put this book down for a few seconds and ponder these questions.
Ready? First, consider whether you have any direct evidence for your belief that
the Earth moves around the sun. When I say “direct evidence,” this is what I have
in mind: when I ride my bicycle, I have direct evidence that I am moving. I feel the
movement of the bike, I feel the wind in my face, I see myself moving past other
objects, and so on. Do you have any direct evidence of this sort that the Earth is
moving around the sun? It seems not. We do not feel like we are moving, nor do
we feel constant high winds in our face. In fact, when you look out the window, it
looks for all the world as if the Earth is stationary.
If you think about your reasons for your belief in a moving Earth, I think you will
ﬁnd you have no direct evidence – none at all – that the Earth is moving around the
sun. Yet your belief is certainly a reasonable belief, and you certainly have some sort
of evidence for it. But rather than direct evidence, the evidence you have is more like
this: try for a moment to believe that the Earth does not move around the sun. Do
you see that that belief does not ﬁt in with your other beliefs? For example, the belief
does not ﬁt with your belief that your teachers, for the most part, have told you the
truth. It does not ﬁt with your belief that, for the most part, what you read in
authoritative books is accurate. It does not ﬁt with your belief that the experts in our
society could not possibly be that wrong about something so basic. And so on.
The general point is that you believe the Earth moves around the sun largely
because that belief ﬁts in with the other pieces in your jigsaw puzzle of beliefs, and
the opposite belief does not ﬁt into that jigsaw puzzle. In other words, your
evidence for that belief is closely tied with your jigsaw puzzle of beliefs, that is,
with your worldview.
Incidentally, it would not be unreasonable to think that even if we ourselves do
not have direct evidence that the Earth moves about the sun, surely experts in
astronomy and related ﬁelds have such evidence. But as we will see in later
chapters, even our experts do not have such direct evidence. This is not by any
means to suggest that there is not good evidence that the Earth moves about the
sun. There is good evidence. But that evidence is much more indirect than I think
it is often assumed to be. And this is typical of many (probably most) of our beliefs.
In summary, we have direct evidence for a surprisingly small number of the
beliefs we hold. For most of our beliefs (maybe almost all of them), we believe
them largely because of the way they ﬁt in with a large package of interconnecting
beliefs. That is, we believe what we do largely because of the way our beliefs ﬁt into
our worldview.
Common sense
Most of us were raised with the Newtonian worldview, and most of the beliefs
mentioned in connection with the Newtonian worldview seem almost like

1 Worldviews

common sense. But think about it a minute – such beliefs are anything but
common sense. For example, it does not look as if the Earth moves around the
sun. As mentioned above, if you look out the window, you will see that the Earth
appears to be perfectly stationary. It also appears that the sun, stars, and planets
move around the Earth approximately every 24 hours. And consider the belief
that you likely learned at an earlier stage in your education, that objects in motion
tend to remain in motion. Most people I know take this to be an obvious truth. But
in our everyday experience, objects in motion do nothing of the sort. For example,
thrown frisbees do not remain in motion. They soon hit the ground and stop.
Thrown baseballs do not remain in motion. Even if they are not caught by
someone else, they soon roll to a halt. In our everyday experience, nothing remains
in motion.
My point is that, in general, the beliefs mentioned above as part of the
Newtonian worldview, although most of us share those beliefs, are not the
beliefs we arrive at by common sense or by common experience. But most of us
were raised with the Newtonian worldview, and since these beliefs were taught
to us from an early age, such beliefs now look to us to be the obviously correct
beliefs. But think about it: if we had been raised with the Aristotelian worldview, then the Aristotelian beliefs would have seemed equally like common
sense.
In short, from within the perspective of any worldview, the beliefs of that
worldview will appear to be the obviously correct ones. So the fact that our basic
beliefs seem to be correct, seem to be common sense, seem to be obviously right,
is not particularly good evidence that those beliefs are correct.
This raises the following interesting issue: there is no doubt that the Aristote­
lian worldview turned out to be badly wrong. The Earth is not the center of the
universe, objects do not behave the way they do because of internal “essential
natures,” and so on. Importantly, it is not just that the individual beliefs were
wrong; rather, the jigsaw puzzle formed by that system of beliefs turned out to be
the wrong sort of jigsaw puzzle. The universe, we now think, is not anything like
the way it was conceptualized from within the Aristotelian worldview. None­
theless, although wrong, those beliefs formed a consistent system of beliefs, and a
system whose beliefs seemed, for almost 2,000 years, to be obviously right and
commonsensical.
Might our jigsaw puzzle, our worldview, turn out to be equally incorrect, even
though our system of beliefs is consistent and seems to us to be obviously correct
and commonsensical? There is no doubt that some of our individual beliefs will
turn out to be wrong. But the question I am asking is whether our entire way of
looking at the world might turn out to be the wrong way of looking at the world, in
something like the way the Aristotelian worldview turned out to be the wrong sort
of jigsaw puzzle.
Or to put the same question another way: when we look at the Aristotelian
worldview, many of the beliefs of that worldview strike us as quaint and curious. If
we think about our descendants, say hundreds of years in the future – or even if
we think about our grandchildren or great grandchildren – might our own beliefs,
those that seem to you and me to be so obviously correct and commonsensical,
look to them to be equally quaint and curious?

15

16

Fundamental Issues

These are interesting questions. Toward the end of the book, we will
explore some recent discoveries that suggest that some parts of our worldview
might indeed turn out to be the wrong sort of way of looking at the world. But
for now, we will leave these as questions to ponder, and move on to our next
topic.

17

2
Truth
This chapter and the next focus on two related topics, truth on the one hand, and
facts on the other. These topics are somewhat unusual for a book on the history
and philosophy of science, but I think they are worth considering early on, largely
to dispel some common misconceptions and oversimpliﬁcations.
It seems to be a fairly widespread belief that the accumulation of facts is a
relatively straightforward process, and that science is, in large part at least, geared
toward generating true theories that account for such facts. Both of these are
largely misconceptions about facts, truth, and their relations to science. One of
the goals of the next two chapters is to show that these issues are much more
complex than is often appreciated. As we will begin to see in this chapter and the
next, and as will become increasingly clear as the book progresses, the relation­
ship between facts, truth, and science is complex and controversial.

Preliminary Issues
We think the belief that the Earth moves around the sun, which is part of our
worldview, is true, and the belief that the Earth is stationary with the sun
moving about it, which is common in the Aristotelian worldview, is false.
Within our system of beliefs, it seems to us obviously true that the Earth moves
about the sun, and it seems to us there are innumerable facts that prove this
belief to be true. But within the Aristotelian worldview, it seemed equally
obvious that the Earth was stationary, and within that system of beliefs there
seemed to be equally many facts that proved the Earth did not move. What is
the difference between our beliefs and their beliefs? If our belief about the Earth
really is true, and their belief really is false, what makes the one belief true and
the other false? More generally, what is truth?
A common reaction to this question is to say that facts are what make a belief
true. For example, one commonly hears that there are facts that prove the Earth
moves about the sun, and these facts are what make the belief true. Interestingly,
facts and truth are often deﬁned in terms of one another. People often answer the
question “What is truth?” by saying true beliefs are those supported by facts. And
the question “What is a fact?” is often answered by saying that facts are those
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

18

Fundamental Issues

things that are true. In fact (no pun intended), my dictionary deﬁnes truth as “a
veriﬁed or indisputable fact,” and then turns around and deﬁnes a fact as “that
which is known to be true.”
But this sort of circularity – deﬁning truth in terms of facts and facts in terms of
truth – sheds no light on our questions. What is truth? What is a fact? What is the
difference between true/factual beliefs and false/nonfactual beliefs? What makes
some beliefs true/factual and others false/nonfactual?
Before tackling these questions directly, take a moment to reﬂect on how much
for granted we take the subject of truth. We all have a large stock of beliefs, and we
think our beliefs are true. After all, why else would we believe them? Chances are,
you would not have bought this book if you did not believe that most of what is
going to be said in the book is true. If you are reading this book as part of a college
course, chances are you are devoting a huge share of resources, both time and
money, to attend that college, and you certainly would not do so if you did not
think that you would learn a sizable share of true things during your college
tenure. And think about history, or, for that matter, think about current events,
both of which are ﬁlled with various incidents (wars, assassinations, religious
conﬂicts, and so on) motivated in large part by the conviction that certain sets of
beliefs are true and others are false. So even if you have not thought about it
explicitly, the issue of truth is likely to be of substantial interest to you. Truth is
something we take for granted every minute of every day, and often with
consequences that are far from trivial.
But rarely do we reﬂect on the subject of truth. As mentioned, one of the main
goals of this chapter is to shed some light on the subject of truth, and to appreciate
some of the complexities involved. We are not going to answer our questions
about truth deﬁnitively – such questions have been debated at least since the
beginning of philosophy and science. As no consensus has emerged over the past
2,000 years, it is unlikely that a consensus will emerge by the end of this chapter.
But some standard views of truth have emerged over the years, and we can at least
get an outline of these standard views, and in doing so, come to appreciate some of
the complexities.

Clarifying the Question
In inquiries such as this, it is usually a good idea to be clear on, and to keep in
mind, the question that is being addressed. It is also worth distinguishing the
question being addressed from other, perhaps related, questions.
When I ask the question “What is truth?” the central question I have in mind is
this: What makes true statements or true beliefs true? And what is it that makes
false statements (or beliefs) false? To phrase it slightly differently, what do true
statements (or beliefs) have in common that makes them true, and what do false
statements (or beliefs) have in common that makes them false?
This central question about truth is often confused with an epistemological
question about truth. Generally speaking, epistemology is the study of knowledge,
and epistemology is an important branch of philosophy. A key epistemological
question about truth – how do we come to know which statements and beliefs are

2 Truth

true? – is an important question, but again, not the key question with which we
are here concerned.
Consider an analogy. Suppose we have a tract of forest, and we are interested in
knowing which of the trees in this tract are oak trees. In this case, our main
question would be an epistemological one – how might we come to know which
trees are oaks? Employing the services of a forestry expert would be an excellent
way to answer this question – we can come to know which of the trees are oaks by
paying attention to what the forestry expert tells us. But the fact that the forestry
expert identiﬁes a tree as an oak is not what makes that tree an oak. In other
words, the question “How do we come to know which trees are oaks?” is a
different question from the question “What makes a tree an oak?”
There is presumably something that oak trees have in common that makes
them oak trees. Likewise, presumably there is something that true statements (or
true beliefs) have in common that makes them true. And that is the key question
in which we are interested: What do true statements (or beliefs) have in common
that makes them true?
Over the years, there have been a large number of theories of truth that have
been offered as possible answers to this question. Most such theories fall into one
of two categories. We will call theories that fall into the ﬁrst of these categories
correspondence theories of truth, while theories that fall into the second category
we will call coherence theories of truth. These are not the only types of theories of
truth that have been proposed, but these two categories cover much of the
territory, and will serve to illustrate many of the complexities surrounding truth.
Also worth noting is that, at this point, we will not be concerned with all of the
speciﬁc versions of correspondence and coherence theories. Where appropriate,
we will mention some of the more notable varieties. Let us begin with correspon­
dence theories of truth.

Correspondence Theories of Truth
In a nutshell, according to correspondence theories of truth, what makes a true
belief true is that the belief corresponds to reality. What makes a false belief false is
that the belief fails to correspond to reality.
For example, if “The Earth moves about the sun” is true (as most of us think it
is), what makes it true is that, in reality, the Earth really does move about the sun.
That is, what makes this belief true is that the belief corresponds to the way things
really are. Likewise, if “the Earth is stationary with the sun moving around it” is
false, it is false because it fails to correspond to reality.
“Reality” is a term used in a variety of ways, so to understand correspondence
theories of truth, it is crucial to appreciate how this term is being used. In this
context, “reality” most deﬁnitely does not refer to what you or I believe reality to be
like. Generally speaking, what you and I believe reality to be like has no effect on
what reality really is like. Likewise, what our best scientists believe reality to be, or
what the majority of the population believes reality to be, or what a Zen master in
an enlightened state of mind believes reality to be, has little effect on what reality
really is. As used in the correspondence theory of truth, “reality” is not “your

19

20

Fundamental Issues

reality,” “my reality,” “Timothy Leary’s reality,” the reality of an acquaintance
under the inﬂuence of strong hallucinogens, or any such thing. Instead, “reality”
refers to “real” reality: a reality that is completely objective, generally independent
of us, and generally speaking in no way depends on what people believe that
reality to be like.
There are, of course, some uninteresting ways in which some of our beliefs
might affect certain aspects of reality. For example, I might believe it is too warm
in my living room, and so turn down the thermostat. In this way, certain of my
beliefs might lead to a change in a certain aspect of reality, such as the air
temperature in my living room. But a proponent of a correspondence theory
would maintain that, in general, our beliefs do not affect reality.
In summary, according to correspondence theories of truth, what makes a true
belief true is that it corresponds to an independent, objective reality. What makes
a false belief false is that it fails to correspond to that reality.

Coherence Theories of Truth
According to coherence theories of truth, what makes a belief true is that the
belief coheres with, or ties in with, other beliefs. For example, consider my belief
that the Earth moves about the sun. I tend to believe what I read in authoritative
astronomy books, and these books assure me that the Earth does indeed move
about the sun. I tend to believe what experts in this area say, and such experts
likewise say the Earth moves about the sun. In general, my belief that the Earth
moves about the sun coheres with other beliefs, and according to coherence
theories of truth, this sort of coherence is what makes a true belief true.
Think back on the jigsaw puzzle analogy used in the discussion of worldviews
from the ﬁrst chapter. Recall that worldviews are systems of beliefs that interlock
in something like the way the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle interlock. The same
analogy can be used to illustrate coherence theories of truth. On this view, what
makes a belief true is that it ﬁts into the overall jigsaw puzzle of beliefs. A false
belief would be like a puzzle piece that does not ﬁt.
In summary, according to coherence theories of truth, what makes a belief true
is that it coheres with some overall collection of beliefs. And what makes a belief
false is that it fails to cohere with that overall collection of beliefs.
Different versions of coherence theories
Thus far, we have spoken of coherence theories in only a very generic fashion. We
need to take a moment to understand how many different types of coherence
theories are possible. In something like the way that a Ford is a type of automobile,
with there being a wide variety of particular versions of Fords, so likewise
coherence theories are a type of theory, with a wide variety of particular versions.
The different versions of coherence theories differ primarily with respect to
whose beliefs are being counted within the jigsaw puzzle of beliefs. Are we
concerned only with an individual’s beliefs, so that, to be true for a particular
individual, “The Earth moves about the sun” must merely cohere with that

2 Truth

individual’s other beliefs? Or are we talking about the beliefs of a group, so that to
be true, “The Earth moves about the sun” must cohere with the collective beliefs
of that group? And if we are speaking of the beliefs of a group, then who counts as
a member of that group? Is it all those who live in a certain geographic region? Is it
those who share a particular worldview? Is it the community of scientists or other
experts?
Depending on how such questions are answered, one arrives at various more
speciﬁc versions of coherence theories. For example, if the beliefs are the beliefs of
the individual in question, then we have what might be called an individualistic
coherence theory. On such a theory, a belief is true for Sara if it ﬁts in with Sara’s
other beliefs; a belief is true for Fred if it ﬁts in with Fred’s other beliefs; and so on.
It should be clear that, on an individualistic coherence theory, truth is relative to
the individual in question. That is, what is true for Sara may not be true for Fred.
If we opt instead to make the collection of beliefs those of a particular group, we
arrive at quite different versions of coherence theories. These might be called
group versions of coherence theories. For the sake of illustration, suppose we hold
that, say, a belief having to do with science is true if it ﬁts in with the collective
beliefs of the group of western scientists. For convenience, let us call such a view a
science-based version of a coherence theory.
Note that, although the individualistic version and the science-based version
are both types of coherence theories of truth, they are quite different theories. To
see this, consider an acquaintance of mine, whose name is Steve. Steve quite
sincerely and with deep conviction believes that the moon is further from the
Earth than is the sun, that the moon is inhabited, and that the moon is a place of
frequent parties and other sorts of revelry. (Steve’s beliefs stem largely from a
strict literal interpretation of certain religious scriptures. Whether his beliefs are
any more or less reasonable than those that stem from a literal interpretation of
other religious scriptures is a topic beyond the scope of this chapter. But it is
worth mentioning that literal interpretations of religious scriptures often lead to
unusual collections of beliefs, such as those of the Flat Earth Society or those of
the Geocentric Society, whose members believe the Earth is the center of the
universe.)
Steve’s jigsaw puzzle of beliefs, although quite different from my jigsaw puzzle
and probably quite different from yours, forms a system of beliefs that tie together
perfectly well. In particular, Steve’s belief that the moon is inhabited by intelligent
beings coheres with the rest of his beliefs. Thus, on the individualistic version of
the coherence theory, Steve’s beliefs about the moon are true. Importantly, Steve’s
beliefs are just as true for him as your beliefs about the moon are for you and mine
are for me.
On the other hand, according to a science-based version of the coherence
theory, Steve’s beliefs about the moon are false, since those beliefs do not cohere
with the overall set of beliefs of western scientists. In short, the individualistic
version and the science-based version are two different theories of truth, although
both of them are types of coherence theories.
The individualistic and science-based versions were presented mainly to
illustrate that different versions of coherence theories are possible. Since different
versions of coherence theories differ mainly on whose set of beliefs “counts,” and

21

22

Fundamental Issues

since there is a wide variety of different ways of specifying whose beliefs count, it
should be clear that a large variety of very different coherence theories are
possible.

Problems/Puzzles about Correspondence Theories of Truth
At ﬁrst glance, some sort of correspondence theory seems like the right idea. After
all, what could be more natural than saying that true beliefs are those that reﬂect
the way things really are? Some thought on the matter, though, suggests that there
are some substantial puzzles surrounding correspondence theories of truth.
By far the major puzzle concerns the appeal to reality. In describing this puzzle,
let’s digress for a moment in order to describe what is generally referred to as the
representational theory of perception. To call it a “theory of perception” is perhaps
a bit grandiose, given that it is what most people take as the common-sense view
of how perception works. Nonetheless, the “representational theory of percep­
tion” is what it has come to be called, and so it is the way we will refer to it.
To understand this theory of perception, an illustration might help. Let’s
consider an acquaintance, whom we will call Sara, and let’s suppose we can peek
into Sara’s consciousness. Borrowing the technique cartoonists commonly use to
let us look into the minds of their characters, this would look as it appears in
Figure 2.1.
The representational theory of perception is a general theory about perception
involving all our senses, including sight, sound, taste, and so on. However, it is

Figure 2.1 A peek into Sara’s consciousness.

2 Truth

most easily illustrated by focusing on vision, so in what follows, most of our
examples concern visual perception. It should be kept in mind, however, that
similar considerations hold for the other senses.
Roughly speaking, when Sara looks at the tree, she receives a visual image of the
tree, the sun, the apple, and so on. These visual images are representations of the
tree. Likewise, if you or I were looking at the tree, we would have similar visual
representations of the tree, the sun, and so on.
At bottom, this is all there is to a representational theory of perception: our
senses provide representations (in the case of vision, representations that are in
some very rough sense like pictures) of things in the external world. Again, this is
a view that almost everyone takes for granted. But it is also a view that has
interesting implications, and some of these implications directly affect corre­
spondence theories of truth.
The most important of these implications is that it entails that we are all, in a
sense, isolated from the world. In particular, there is no way for us to know if the
representations provided us by our senses are accurate. This claim – that we
cannot know whether our representations are accurate – is a strong claim, and so
I will take some time to defend it.
In particular, I will present two different explanations of why, if the represen­
tational theory of perception is correct, we cannot know if the representations
provided by our senses are accurate. The ﬁrst explanation focuses on how we go
about assessing the accuracy of representations, and the second explanation
revolves around what I will call the “Total Recall scenario.”
Assessing the accuracy of representations
Consider how we go about assessing the accuracy of an ordinary representation, such
as a photograph, or a street map, and so on. Suppose we have before us some ordinary
representation, say, a photograph of Devil’s Tower. (Devil’s Tower is an interesting
geological feature – it resembles a very large cylinder rising out of the ground –
located in northeastern Wyoming.) The obvious way to assess the accuracy of this
photograph is to go to Wyoming and compare the photograph of Devil’s Tower with
Devil’s Tower itself. Likewise, to assess the accuracy of a street map of New York City,
you would compare the map with what it is a map of. To assess the accuracy of a
topographic map, you would compare the topographic features on the map with the
actual terrain that the map is supposed to be representing.
The bottom line is this: to assess the accuracy of a representation, we need to
compare (a) the representation, for example, the photograph of Devil’s Tower,
with (b) the thing represented, for example, Devil’s Tower itself.
If our senses provide us with representations of the external world, then a
reasonable question to ask is whether those representations are accurate. And to
assess the accuracy of the representations provided by our senses, we would need
to compare those representations with the things being represented.
But look again at the diagram of Sara in Figure 2.1. Suppose Sara wants to assess
the accuracy of her visual representation of the apple. To do this, she would need
to compare her visual representation of the apple with the apple itself. But there is
no way for Sara to do this. Sara cannot step outside of her own consciousness.

23

24

Fundamental Issues

Figure 2.2 Sara’s conscious experience.

From Sara’s point of view, all she has available is what is in her consciousness. To
illustrate, consider Figure 2.2 illustrating Sara’s point of view – that is all Sara has.
She cannot step outside of her own conscious experience in order to compare
what is in that experience with what is presumably causing that experience. In
short, it seems that Sara has no way of comparing her visual representation of the
apple with the apple itself, and hence has no way of assessing whether her visual
representation of the apple is accurate.
Could Sara compare her visual image of the apple with, say, the sense of touch
she receives when she feels the apple, or with the smell of the apple, and thereby
conclude that her visual representation of the apple is accurate?
Sara could certainly compare her visual image with her tactile sensations, as
well as with the olfactory sensations she receives when she smells the apple. But
notice that her sense of touch is itself a representation, and her sense of smell
likewise is a representation. So when Sara compares the visual image of the apple
with her sense of touch when she touches the apple, or with her sense of smell
when she smells the apple, she is comparing representations with other repre­
sentations. To assess the accuracy of her visual representation she needs to
compare the representation with the thing represented, not with other
representations.
This situation is very much like trying to assess the accuracy of a photograph of
Devil’s Tower by comparing the photograph with, say, a topographic map of
Devil’s Tower, or with a street map of the roads around Devil’s Tower. In such a
case, what is being compared is one representation with another representation.
The needed comparison – of the representation with the thing represented – is
not being made.
The implication is that there is no way for us to assess the accuracy of the
representations our senses provide us. Or to say the same thing in different words,
there is no way for us to know for sure what reality is really like.
The Total Recall scenario
As a second way to explain why, if the representational theory of perception is
correct, there is no way for us to know whether our representations of the world
are accurate, consider the Total Recall scenario. Total Recall is a science ﬁction
movie. The movie is set in the future – say, the late twenty-fourth century – and in
this period, if one wishes to take a vacation but cannot afford that vacation, there

2 Truth

is the less expensive option of having the experiences of the vacation implanted
into one’s mind. That is, there are companies who specialize in such virtual
vacations. You pay the fee, and the company hooks you up to a device that
implants totally realistic experiences of the vacation of your choice directly into
your mind. The experiences are of a virtual reality so realistic that it is impossible
to tell them from the real thing. (It is not crucial for our discussion, but the plot of
the movie involves the main character’s inability to tell whether his conscious
experience is of reality or of realistic but unreal images being implanted into his
mind. Another popular movie with a similar theme is The Matrix. Also, this idea
was not by any means invented by Hollywood – as we will discuss shortly,
Descartes considered it in some detail back in the 1600s.)
With this in mind, refer again to Figure 2.1, and consider Sara’s conscious
experience. Sara believes her visual image of the apple, the feel of the apple, the
taste and smell of the apple, and so on, are caused by there really being a tree, an
apple, and so on. But if Sara were in a Total Recall scenario, with these sensations
being implanted into her mind, her conscious experience would be exactly the
same. Pictorially, the situation would be as shown in Figure 2.3. Notice that Sara’s
conscious experience in both the “normal” situation depicted in Figure 2.1 and the
Total Recall scenario depicted in Figure 2.3 is exactly the same. She has no way of
knowing for sure that she is not in a Total Recall scenario. That is, she has no way
of knowing for sure whether her conscious experience is caused by an external
world like that in Figure 2.1 or by an external world like that in Figure 2.3. In short,
Sara has no way of knowing for sure what reality is really like.
Of course, the same situation applies for you as for Sara. Suppose you are
living in the twenty-fourth century, and you are a historian specializing in the
early twenty-ﬁrst century. Suppose you have decided to experience, via a Total
Recall scenario, what life in the early twenty-ﬁrst century was like. Part of that
Total Recall scenario might involve reading (or having the experiences as if you

Figure 2.3 The Total Recall scenario.

25

26

Fundamental Issues

were reading) a book on the history and philosophy of science from that period.
Your current experience – these words, this page, this book, your current
surroundings – might be part of a Total Recall scenario. And if it were, you
would have no way of knowing.
The bottom line is that, although we all believe our experiences are caused by a
“normal” reality, we have no way of knowing for sure that they are not caused by
the sort of reality envisioned in the Total Recall scenario. We have no way of
knowing, for sure, what reality is really like.
A word of caution
Be careful not to misunderstand the point of the discussions above. The proper
conclusion to draw is not that reality is completely unlike what we believe it to be.
Rather, the proper conclusion is that we cannot know for sure what reality is like.
And if we cannot know for sure what reality is like, it follows that, if the
correspondence theory of truth is correct, we can never know for sure whether
any belief – or at least, any belief about the external world – is true.
This does not show that correspondence theories are wrong, or unacceptable,
or incoherent. Recall that the correspondence theory of truth is a theory about
what makes a belief true or false, whereas the accuracy discussion and the Total
Recall discussion make an epistemological point about what we can know. And, as
we discussed earlier, the question of what makes beliefs true or false is a different
question than such epistemological questions about knowledge. But the accuracy
discussion and the Total Recall scenario do illustrate a rather interesting aspect of
correspondence theories, and this aspect is one of the main reasons many people
ﬁnd them unappealing.

Problems/Puzzles for Coherence Theories of Truth
Let us begin by focusing on an individualistic version of a coherence theory.
Remember that on this theory, a belief is true for an individual if it ﬁts into the
overall collection of beliefs for that individual, and false if it does not ﬁt into that
overall collection of beliefs. So what is true for my acquaintance Steve (mentioned
above), and what is true for me, are two very different things. For example, it is
true for Steve that the moon is inhabited, whereas it is true for me that the moon
is not inhabited. It is true for Steve that the moon is further from the Earth than is
the sun, whereas the opposite is true for me. In short, there are no independent
truths; rather, truth is relative to individuals.
Importantly, there is no distinguishing, on an individualistic version, between
“better” and “worse” truths. Steve’s belief that the moon is inhabited is just as true
(for him) as my belief that the moon is uninhabited is true (for me). All beliefs
are equally true for the individual holding those beliefs. There is no way to say, on
the individualistic version of the coherence theory, that my beliefs are any more
true than are Steve’s beliefs.
In short, the individualistic version turns out to be an extreme “anything goes”
sort of relativism. While this does not prove conclusively that the individualistic

2 Truth

version is incorrect, it is worth noting that most people ﬁnd a view that is this
relativistic to be unacceptable.
Consider now group versions of coherence theories. Recall that on these
versions, a belief is true if it ﬁts in with the overall collection of some group
(which group counts depends on the particular theory). The main problems for
such theories are:
a) they do not allow for the possibility that a group might hold a mistaken belief;
b) there is no way to specify who exactly counts as a member of the group in
question; and
c) with any group, there is no shared set of beliefs that are consistent.
Let’s look at each of these problems more carefully.
With respect to (a), suppose Sara has been successfully framed for a crime she
did not commit. When I say that Sara was successfully framed, I mean that the
members of the group in question (American society, say) have come to be
convinced that Sara is indeed guilty. Presumably, then, “Sara is guilty” ﬁts in
with the rest of the group’s beliefs, and so, according to the group version of the
coherence theory, “Sara is guilty” is true. But Sara was framed, and we want to
be able to say that the group is simply mistaken in its belief about Sara’s guilt.
But note that, on the group version of the coherence theory, the group is not
mistaken – “Sara is guilty” is true. In fact, it is Sara who holds the false belief.
On this version of truth, when Sara thinks “I am not guilty,” her belief, because
it does not ﬁt in with the overall collection of beliefs of the group, is false. In
other words, this version of truth seems to get this case exactly backward. And
in general, on a group version of the coherence theory, it is difﬁcult to see how a
group could be mistaken in the beliefs its members hold. This is a very odd
consequence of this version of truth.
With respect to (b), groups are not well-deﬁned collections. For example,
consider a group version of the coherence theory in which the group in question
is the group of western scientists. According to this theory, what makes a belief true
is whether or not it ﬁts in with the overall collection of beliefs of the group of western
scientists. But who counts as a western scientist? Consider Jim, another acquain­
tance of mine with unusual beliefs. Jim believes, quite sincerely, that the Earth is the
center of the universe. (Incidentally, I and most of my acquaintances hold fairly
mainstream beliefs, but I ﬁnd it helpful to keep in contact with a number of
individuals outside the mainstream.) Notably, Jim is also a practicing physicist, with
a doctorate in physics from a respected institution and with publications in
mainstream physics journals. Yet he holds quite unusual beliefs about the structure
of the universe. So should we consider him as a member of the group of western
scientists? Similar questions arise for any number of other individuals, and in
general it simply is not clear whether large numbers of individuals should or should
not be counted as members of the group in question. Groups have very fuzzy edges,
and it is difﬁcult if not impossible to precisely specify the members of any group.
Recall that, according to a group version of the coherence theory, a belief is true
if it ﬁts in with the overall beliefs of the group. But if the group itself is not well
deﬁned, then the theory of truth will not be well deﬁned. In short, it is not clear
that a group version of the coherence theory is itself a coherent theory.

27

28

Fundamental Issues

Finally, with respect to (c), even if we could overcome the problem of specifying
who counts as a member of the group in question, note that groups simply do not
have consistent collections of beliefs. One member of the group may believe thus
and such, and another member may believe the opposite. This will be common in
any collection, any group, of people. But if there is no consistent set of beliefs
among the members of the group in question, then there is no consistent jigsaw
puzzle of beliefs for the group. And if there is no consistent jigsaw puzzle of
beliefs, then the group version of the coherence theory, which assumes there is a
consistent jigsaw puzzle of beliefs, is again not well deﬁned.
In summary, individualistic versions of coherence theories seem to degenerate
into an unacceptable sort of relativism. Group versions of coherence theories, on
the other hand, seem to avoid the relativism problem, but in doing so they
introduce new and substantial problems. So neither coherence theories of truth
nor correspondence theories of truth provide a fully satisfying answer to our
central question about truth.

Philosophical Reﬂections: Descartes and the Cogito
Before closing this chapter, it might be worth taking a moment to consider a more
general philosophical question, and one raised by some of the issues we have
discussed. Earlier in this chapter, we saw that if the usual view of perception is
correct – that is, the representational theory of perception – then there is an
important sense in which we cannot be certain of what reality is like. This is an
extraordinarily broad-reaching claim, and given this conclusion one might
reasonably wonder whether there is anything of which we can be certain.
Probably the best-known exploration of this question is that of René Descartes
(1596–1650). Descartes considered this issue in a number of contexts, the most
widely known being the discussion in his Meditations on First Philosophy (usually
referred to as the Meditations). In the Meditations, one of Descartes’ early goals is
to ﬁnd an absolutely certain foundation on which to build knowledge. That is, he
wants to ﬁnd one or more beliefs of which he can be absolutely certain, and then
carefully and logically build remaining knowledge on this certain foundation.
In what we might think of as sort of a litmus test for certainty, Descartes
employs a scenario closely analogous to the Total Recall scenario discussed above.
As in the Total Recall scenario, Descartes considers the possibility that reality is
nothing like it appears to be in his conscious experience. Descartes uses the idea of
a powerful “evil deceiver” that is able to plant ideas and perceptions directly into
his mind. If he can ﬁnd a belief of which he can be certain even if there were such
an evil deceiver, such a belief would be the sort of certain belief Descartes wants as
a foundation from which to build. (Descartes’ evil deceiver plays a role closely
analogous to the machine in Figure 2.3 that is planting ideas and perceptions in
Sara’s mind, and to the devices responsible for creating the virtual realities in
movies such as Total Recall and The Matrix discussed earlier.)
So Descartes is looking for a belief that can pass the evil deceiver test, that is, a
belief he could be certain of even if there were an evil deceiver. Clearly, most of
our beliefs will not pass such a test. For example, the belief that there is a desk in

2 Truth

front of me would not pass such a test – if there were such an evil deceiver, it could
easily fool me into thinking I am seeing a desk when there really is none. Even my
belief that I have a body would not pass such a test, since the deceiver could be
planting images into my disembodied brain or mind.
Is there any belief that can pass such a test, that is, any belief of which we can be
absolutely certain? Descartes thought he found at least one, and this belief is
captured in his well-known “Cogito, ergo sum,” that is, “I think, therefore I am.”
This belief, Descartes claims, is one in which he can be absolutely certain.
Incidentally, strictly speaking, the phrase “I think, therefore I am” does not
appear in the Meditations (though it does appear in some of Descartes’ other
writings). What he does say in the Meditations is that “I am, I exist” is necessarily
true every time he thinks it. In other words, that he exists, at least as a thinking
thing, is a belief of which he can be absolutely certain. Note that he is not saying
that his body necessarily exists (again, the machine in the Total Recall scenario, or
Descartes’ evil deceiver, could fool us into mistakenly thinking we had a body).
Rather, what Descartes can be certain of is that every time he thinks “I am, I exist,”
he must exist at least as a thinking thing. Presumably, when thinking “I am, I
exist,” he must be thinking in order to have such a thought, and this is why he
must exist at least as a thinking thing. Incidentally, to give credit where credit is
due, St. Augustine (354–430) had expressed similar views, even though these
views are now more commonly associated with Descartes.
There is a reasonable case to be made that Descartes’ “I am, I exist” is indeed a
belief of which we can be absolutely certain. So perhaps we can at least be sure of
our own existence. Perhaps, contrary to the way it was beginning to appear, there
is at least something of which we can be absolutely certain.
Let’s return now to Descartes’ foundational strategy. Recall that the idea was to
ﬁnd some certain beliefs from which to carefully deduce other beliefs, and thus build
a structure of knowledge based on an absolutely certain foundation. At this point,
you can probably guess the general problem Descartes is going to face: the
foundation is just too small. A good case can be made that we can be certain of
our own existence (at least of our existence as a thinking thing), and perhaps a case
can be made that we can be certain of a relatively small handful of other beliefs (for
example, perhaps we can be certain of highly qualiﬁed beliefs, such as that there
seems to be a desk in front of me). But it is safe to say that Descartes found a quite
small number of beliefs (and perhaps only one) of which he could be absolutely
certain, and as it will turn out, this foundation is just too small to build on.
Descartes’ foundational project was certainly one worth trying. And although
the overall project did not succeed, it is worth noting that Descartes did ﬁnd at
least one belief of which we can be certain.

Concluding Remarks
Although we took a brief digression above to discuss the question of whether
there are any beliefs of which we can be certain, the main topic of this chapter
is the issue of truth. As we have seen, truth is a puzzling notion. As mentioned in
the beginning of this chapter, theories of truth have been discussed for the past

29

30

Fundamental Issues

2,000 years, with no consensus emerging. Our goal in this chapter was to
sketch some of the main theories of truth, while providing an illustration of
why those views, as well as issues surrounding truth in general, are puzzling and
problematic.
As noted at the beginning of the chapter, it seems to be a reasonably common
view that science is geared toward generating true theories to account for
reasonably straightforward facts. It should be clear at this point that one cannot
view science itself, nor the history and philosophy of science, as a simple story
about science generating an ever larger collection of true beliefs and true theories.
As we have seen in this chapter, and as we will continue to see in Part II when we
begin to look in more detail at cases from the history of science, the issues are
much more complex. In the next chapter, we explore another related, and again
complex, topic, involving issues surrounding the notion of facts.

31

3
Empirical Facts and Philosophical/Conceptual Facts
In the previous chapter, we saw that issues surrounding truth are more complex
than generally appreciated. In this brief chapter we explore the related topic of
facts.
There is no question that facts and science are closely tied to one another.
Whatever else one may wish from scientiﬁc theories, there is a general consensus
that such theories ought to account for the relevant facts. But as with truth, issues
surrounding the notion of facts are complex, and in this chapter we explore some
of these complexities.

Preliminary Observations
I am going to go slowly through an example involving pencils and desks and
drawers. Although the example may seem trivial at ﬁrst, bear with me. The point
is subtle, and an important one for appreciating issues involved in the history and
philosophy of science.
Consider a case involving what is probably the most straightforward sort of fact
we can have. For example, let’s assume you are sitting at a desk, and that you put a
pencil on the desk in front of you. That there is a pencil on the desk in front of you
is as clear an example of a fact as you can ﬁnd. You can see and feel the pencil, hear
the sound the pencil makes as you tap it on the desk, and even taste and smell the
pencil if you are so inclined. You have straightforward, direct, observational
evidence that there is a pencil on the desk.
Facts of this sort, based on observation, are often referred to as empirical facts.
As we will see shortly, what counts as an empirical fact is not as clear-cut as it
might initially seem. Moreover, as we discussed in the previous chapter, there is a
sense in which you cannot absolutely know for sure that reality is as you perceive
it to be. Given this, you cannot be absolutely sure that there is a pencil on the desk
in front of you. But nonetheless, this is a case in which you have the most direct,
straightforward, “in your face” sort of observational evidence, and if anything
counts as an empirical fact, it is that there is a pencil on the desk in front of you. In
general, facts of this sort, which are supported by direct, straightforward,
observational evidence, provide the clearest examples of empirical facts.
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

32

Fundamental Issues

Now consider another case. Suppose you put another pencil on the desk in
front of you. Again, you can see, feel, hear, and (if you wish) smell and taste the
two pencils. Again, that there are two pencils on the desk in front of you would be
as straightforward an empirical fact as you can ﬁnd.
Now take one of the pencils and put it in a desk drawer, closing the drawer so
that you cannot see, feel, or otherwise perceive the pencil. Chances are you believe
the pencil continues to exist even when you are not perceiving it. That is, you
believe it is a fact that there is a pencil in the drawer.
But now reﬂect on your reasons for these beliefs. Notice in particular that your
reasons for believing there is a pencil in the drawer cannot be the same as your
reasons for believing there is a pencil on the desk. Your belief about the pencil on
the desk is based on direct observational evidence, whereas your belief that there
is a pencil in the drawer cannot be based on any such direct observational
evidence. After all, you cannot see, touch, or otherwise observe the pencil in the
drawer, so you cannot have direct observational evidence for this belief. So why do
you believe so strongly that there is a pencil in the drawer?
I suspect you believe this because of the way you view the world. Most of us
cannot imagine that objects go out of existence when they are no longer being
observed. Our conviction about the sort of world we live in – our belief that the
world consists largely of stable objects that remain in existence even when not
being observed – is the root of our belief that there is a pencil in the drawer.
So notice the substantial difference between the reasons for believing there is a
pencil on the desk and the reasons for believing there is a pencil in the drawer. The
one belief is based on direct observational evidence, while the other belief stems
largely from our views on the sort of world we live in. Although we tend to have
the same depth of conviction in each of these beliefs – that there is a pencil on the
desk and that there is a pencil in the drawer – there is a substantial difference in
the reasons we have for believing each of them.
What does this have to do with the history and philosophy of science? As noted,
a scientiﬁc theory has to respect the relevant facts. But in looking at theories from
the history of science, and in looking at the facts those theories were required to
respect, we can in hindsight clearly see that some of those facts – although people
believed they were reasonably clear empirical facts – were actually based more on
philosophical/conceptual convictions about the sort of world the people involved
inhabited.
An example may help to illustrate this point. From the time of the ancient
Greeks, and continuing until the early 1600s, it was widely believed that planets
(and other objects in the heavens) moved with perfectly circular and uniform
motion. For example, all motion associated with a planet such as Mars was
thought to be perfectly circular. The motion was also believed to be uniform, that
is, always at the same rate, never speeding up or slowing down.
In contrast, on our current theories (for which there is strong support), a planet
such as Mars moves in an elliptical (not circular) orbit about the sun, and moves at
varying speeds in different parts of its orbit. So both of the beliefs mentioned
above – let’s call them the “perfect circle fact” and the “uniform motion fact” –
turned out to be mistaken.

3 Empirical Facts and Philosophical/Conceptual Facts

The perfect circle and uniform motion facts sound quite alien to modern ears.
A typical reaction, when ﬁrst learning of the belief in these “facts,” is to wonder,
“Why would anyone ever have believed that?” Yet it is important to realize that,
for a long period in our history, the perfect circle and uniform motion facts
seemed to be obvious facts about the world in which we live. As mentioned in the
ﬁrst chapter, objects in the heavens were composed of the element ether, and the
essential nature of this element was to move in perfectly circular, uniform motion.
Obviously, then, all motion of the sun, stars, and planets must be perfectly circular
and uniform. In something like the way it seems like an obvious fact to us, given
the sort of universe we think we inhabit, that the pencil continues to exist when
out of sight in the drawer, so too did it seem like an obvious fact to our
predecessors that heavenly bodies move with perfectly circular, uniform motion.
These sorts of facts, that is, strongly held beliefs that turn out to be based
heavily on philosophical/conceptual views as to the sort of world we live in, are
what I will generally refer to as “philosophical/conceptual facts.” However, we
need to be careful here.
Importantly, empirical facts, on the one hand, and philosophical/conceptual
facts, on the other, are not absolute categories, that is, most beliefs do not fall
cleanly into just one or the other. Rather, most beliefs are based on a mixture of
empirically based observational evidence, together with more general views about
the sort of world we inhabit. For example, consider again the perfect circle and
uniform motion facts discussed above. Although these beliefs were tied closely to
other beliefs, such as the nature of the element ether, the heavens being a region of
perfection, and so on, there was also an observational, empirical component to
these beliefs. For example, going back at least to the beginnings of recorded
history, people had observed that stars move across the sky in what appears to be
perfectly circular, uniform motion. And that fact – that the points of light we call
stars seem to move in perfectly circular, uniform motion – is based heavily on
empirical observation. So even the perfect circle and uniform motion facts turn
out to have at least some empirical component to them.
In light of such considerations, it is better to think in terms of a continuum. At
one end of the continuum are the most straightforward examples of empirical
facts, such as the fact that there is a pencil on the table. At the other end of the
continuum are the clearest examples of philosophical/conceptual facts, for
example, beliefs such as the perfect circle and uniform motion facts.
Most of our beliefs – most of what we take to be facts – lie somewhere on the
continuum between the clearest examples of empirical facts and the clearest
examples of philosophical/conceptual facts. That is, the reasons we have for most
beliefs are tied partly to observational, empirically based evidence, and partly to
the way those beliefs ﬁt in with our overall jigsaw puzzle of beliefs.
As we will see in later chapters, certain philosophical/conceptual facts, includ­
ing the perfect circle and uniform motion facts, turn out to play substantial roles
in the history and philosophy of science. And as we will explore in Part III, certain
beliefs that most of us take to be obvious empirical facts, and that most people
raised in the western world likewise take to be clear empirical facts, turn out, in
light of recent discoveries, to be mistaken philosophical/conceptual “facts.”

33

34

Fundamental Issues

A Note on Terminology
In the discussion above, you may have noticed that I used the word “fact” when
speaking of beliefs that we are now sure are incorrect. For example, I character­
ized the beliefs that the heavenly bodies move with perfectly uniform and
perfectly circular motion as facts (albeit as philosophical/conceptual facts). Given
that we generally do not use “fact” in this way – that is, when we discover that a
previously held belief is mistaken, we usually cease to speak of it as a fact – a brief
discussion of my use of the term is in order.
What we have here is a terminological problem. We simply do not have the
right word to properly characterize deeply held and (at least in the context of the
time) well-justiﬁed beliefs that turn out to be wrong, such as our predecessors’
beliefs in perfectly uniform and perfectly circular motion. Of the two alternatives
that come to mind ﬁrst – characterizing such views as “assumptions,” on the one
hand, or as “beliefs,” on the other – neither term is close to being right.
Consider the term “assumption.” The views in question are far from mere
assumptions. For example, as we discussed to some extent above, and as we will
explore more fully in Chapter 9, our predecessors’ beliefs in perfectly circular,
perfectly uniform motion were, in the context of the time, well-justiﬁed beliefs.
They turned out to be mistaken, but it would be badly misleading to characterize
these beliefs as mere assumptions.
Likewise for the term “belief.” Distinguishing facts from beliefs suggests that
there is a reasonably clear distinction between the two – it suggests that facts are
one thing, mere beliefs another. But there is not such a clear distinction between
the two – at least, not from within one’s own lifetime or from within one’s own
worldview (again, consider the case of the pencil on the desk versus the pencil in
the drawer). Strongly held and well-supported beliefs appear, from within one’s
worldview, to be facts.
In short, none of the available terms is quite right. I think the best option is the
one taken above – that is, with respect to strongly held and well-justiﬁed beliefs, to
characterize those based more on reasonably direct observational evidence as
empirical facts, and those more closely tied to one’s overall worldview as
philosophical/conceptual facts. And even in the cases in which some of these
strongly held beliefs turn out to be incorrect, I think it best to continue to refer to
these as philosophical/conceptual facts in order to remind ourselves that, from
within the relevant worldview, these were much more than mere assumptions,
beliefs, or opinions.

Concluding Remarks
Before closing this chapter, it is worth taking a moment to make a few ﬁnal
observations about empirical and philosophical/conceptual facts.
To re-emphasize a point made above, do not think of empirical facts and
philosophical/conceptual facts as absolute categories. Most beliefs are based on a
combination of empirical evidence and more general views about the sort of
world we inhabit. As noted, it is better to think of the distinction between

3 Empirical Facts and Philosophical/Conceptual Facts

empirical facts and philosophical/conceptual facts more in terms of a continuum,
with the clearest examples of empirically based beliefs (such as the belief involving
the pencil on the table) at one end, and the clearest examples of beliefs more
closely tied to general philosophical/conceptual views (such as the beliefs in
perfectly circular and uniform motion of the heavenly bodies) at the other end.
Also, be careful not to make the error of viewing philosophical/conceptual facts
as the sort of facts one would only ﬁnd as part of an old, naive way of thinking. Our
predecessors’ beliefs in the perfect circle and uniform motion facts turned out to
be wrong, but the beliefs were not naive. As is typical with philosophical/
conceptual facts, the perfect circle and uniform motion facts ﬁt in well with
the overall system of beliefs, and from within that worldview they were well
justiﬁed.
Likewise, do not make the mistake of thinking that we, in this period of modern
science, have managed to avoid the pitfalls of believing in philosophical/concep­
tual facts. Such facts are still a part of the modern story, and as noted above, part of
the point of Part III of this book will be to look into developments in twentiethcentury science, with an eye toward identifying some facts that we have long taken
as straightforward empirical facts, but that turn out, in light of recent discoveries,
to be mistaken philosophical/conceptual facts.
Also, calling a fact a philosophical/conceptual fact is not to suggest that it is
incorrect. Many philosophical/conceptual facts of the past did indeed turn out to
be wrong. No doubt some of our own philosophical/conceptual facts will turn out
to be wrong. But most such facts will, we hope, withstand the test of time, and turn
out to be at least more or less correct. To put this same point another way, the
distinction between empirical facts and philosophical/conceptual facts is not
based on whether the facts turn out to be correct; rather, the distinction is based
on the type of reasons we have for believing the fact.
Finally, it is worth noting that, in everyday life, we typically do not make much
of a distinction between empirical facts and philosophical/conceptual facts. With
the beneﬁt of hindsight, especially when looking at past cultures, it is relatively
easy to see which beliefs were more empirical and which were more philosophi­
cal/conceptual. But within our own time frame, facts just look like facts, and they
all, empirical and philosophical/conceptual, look pretty much on a par. It is only
on careful reﬂection, and often with great difﬁculty, that we can see that some
beliefs we hold are more empirically based, and some are more philosophical/
conceptual.

35

36

4
Conﬁrming and Disconﬁrming Evidence and Reasoning
The main goal of this chapter is to explore issues surrounding the most common
types of reasoning found in science. We will look both at evidence and reasoning
used to support theories, and at evidence and reasoning that purports to show a
theory is incorrect. In keeping with a recurring theme of this text, we will see that
the issues involved are more complex than they might at ﬁrst seem.
Discoveries, evidence, and reasoning in science (and in everyday life as well)
are often quite complicated. Our strategy will be to focus ﬁrst on two of the
more straightforward types of evidence and reasoning, which for convenience I
will refer to as conﬁrmation reasoning and disconﬁrmation reasoning. We will
begin with a brief sketch of each, and then explore some of the subtleties
involved.

Conﬁrmation Reasoning
About 100 years ago, Einstein proposed the general theory of relativity. It was a
controversial theory, and in certain ways it conﬂicted with other accepted
theories. Notably, using relativity theory one could make unusual predictions –
unusual in the sense that other theories did not make the same predictions. For
example, Einstein’s theory predicted that the gravitational effect of a large body,
such as the sun, would bend starlight. It would be possible to observe such
bending of starlight during a total solar eclipse, so the solar eclipse that was to
occur in May of 1919 provided an opportunity to test the prediction. As it
turned out, these predictions were correct, and this was taken as evidence
supporting (that is, helping to conﬁrm) Einstein’s relativity theory. In other
words, the fact that Einstein’s theory made correct predictions, and, notably,
predictions not made by competing theories, was taken as evidence that the
theory was correct.
Notice there is nothing unique to science about this sort of reasoning. We use
the same sort of reasoning all the time. In general, when we base predictions on
a certain theory, and those predictions turn out to be correct, this provides at
least some evidence that the theory is correct. If we use T to represent a theory,

Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

4 Conﬁrming and Disconﬁrming Evidence and Reasoning

and O to represent one or more observations predicted by the theory T, we can
schematically represent this reasoning as follows:
If T, then O
O
so

(probably) T

It is worth noting that the Einstein example above, and the schema just
outlined, are quite simpliﬁed accounts of conﬁrmation reasoning. Again, at
this point we are just interested in a brief introduction to this type of reasoning.
We will next consider a brief sketch of disconﬁrmation reasoning, and then move
on to look at some of the factors that make such reasoning more complicated than
it might at ﬁrst appear.

Disconﬁrmation Reasoning
To understand disconﬁrmation reasoning, it is again easiest to use an example. In
the late 1980s, two well-established scientists claimed to have discovered a way to
achieve nuclear fusion at low temperatures (so-called cold fusion). This claim was
very exciting but also quite controversial, since the general consensus is that
nuclear fusion requires extremely high temperatures. Suppose we call their claim
(essentially the claim that fusion is possible at low temperatures, and that they had
the key ideas on how to accomplish such fusion) “cold fusion theory.”
As is usually the case, certain predictions could be made on the basis of cold
fusion theory. For example, if cold fusion theory was correct, one would expect a
very high number of neutrons to be emitted during the process. Yet the expected
level of neutrons was not detected, and this was taken as evidence against the cold
fusion theory. Again, there is nothing at all unusual about this type of reasoning. In
general, when we make predictions based on a particular theory, and those
predictions turn out not to be correct, we take this as evidence against the theory.
Again using T to represent the theory, and O to represent one or more observations
predicted by T, we can schematically represent this reasoning as follows:
If T, then O
Not O
so

Not T

It is again worth emphasizing that this reasoning scheme is overly simpliﬁed,
and should be considered a ﬁrst approximation to disconﬁrmation reasoning. We
will now move on to consider some of the complicating factors involved in
conﬁrmation and disconﬁrmation reasoning, beginning with the distinction
between inductive and deductive reasoning.

Inductive and Deductive Reasoning
Conﬁrmation reasoning is a type of inductive reasoning, whereas disconﬁrmation
reasoning is a type of deductive reasoning. The inductive nature of conﬁrmation
reasoning and the deductive nature of disconﬁrmation reasoning have certain

37

38

Fundamental Issues

important implications. To get at these implications, we ﬁrst need to be clear on
the difference between inductive and deductive reasoning.
You may have heard that inductive reasoning moves from the speciﬁc to the
general, whereas deductive reasoning moves from the general to the speciﬁc.
While this holds for some cases of inductive and deductive reasoning, overall it is
not accurate, and so it is not a good way to characterize inductive and deductive
reasoning.
There is a more straightforward, more accurate, and more insightful way to
characterize inductive and deductive reasoning. Consider the following as a
typical example of inductive reasoning:
The local college men’s basketball team has never won the NCAA champi­
onship. For that matter, on the few occasions that the team has been in the
NCAA tournament, it has never made it past the ﬁrst round of competition.
This year’s team is not that much different from the teams of the past, nor
has anything else changed dramatically about the men’s basketball program.
In light of all these factors, it is extremely unlikely that the men’s team will
win the NCAA tournament this year.
This provides a nice example of a convincing inductive argument. Given the
premises of the argument, the conclusion is very likely. However – and this is the
deﬁning characteristic of inductive reasoning – even if all the premises and the
evidence are correct, it is still possible that the conclusion is wrong. However
unlikely, it is possible that the men’s basketball team will win this year’s NCAA
tournament. This, then, is what characterizes inductive reasoning: in a good
inductive argument, even if all the premises are true, it is still possible for the
conclusion to be wrong.
In contrast, in a good deductive argument, true premises guarantee a true
conclusion. That is, in a good deductive argument, if all the premises are true,
then the conclusion also must be true. Consider the following example borrowed
from the movie No Way Out:
The man who was in Linda’s apartment that night killed Linda. And
whoever killed Linda is Uri. Commander Farrell was the man in Linda’s
apartment that night. Therefore, Commander Farrell is Uri.
This argument is interestingly different from the inductive example. In
particular, the premises of this argument, if true, guarantee that the conclusion
is true. And this is what characterizes deductive arguments: in a good deductive
argument, true premises guarantee a true conclusion.
With this in mind, let us return to our discussion of conﬁrmation and dis­
conﬁrmation reasoning. Remember that conﬁrmation reasoning is a type of
inductive reasoning. Simply because conﬁrmation reasoning is inductive, instances
of such reasoning will not guarantee the conclusion. That is, conﬁrmation reason­
ing can at best provide support for a theory, but no matter how many instances of
conﬁrmed predictions there are, it will always remain possible that the theory is in
fact mistaken. This is simply due to the inductive nature of such reasoning.

4 Conﬁrming and Disconﬁrming Evidence and Reasoning

The inductive nature of conﬁrmation reasoning is part of the reason why you
sometimes hear the claim that scientiﬁc theories can never be proven (at least, not
in the strong sense of “proven”). Most scientiﬁc theories are supported in large
part by inductive evidence. As such, no matter how much conﬁrming evidence
exists for a theory, it is always possible, simply because of the inductive nature of
the reasoning involved, that the theory will turn out to be wrong. The fact that
theories in science cannot be shown without a doubt to be correct is no ﬂaw of
such theories, nor is it any defect in science itself. Rather, it is simply a
consequence of the fact that conﬁrmation reasoning is a widely used type of
reasoning supporting theories, and the fact that conﬁrmation reasoning is a form
of inductive reasoning.
It is also worth emphasizing that the factors and reasoning involved in real-life
science are usually much more complex and intertwined than might be suggested
by the discussion so far. To illustrate this with just one example, consider again
the case of the bending of starlight predicted by Einstein’s theory. This would
appear to be a pretty simple prediction and observation. Everyone agrees that
Einstein’s theory predicts the bending of starlight, and that a solar eclipse would
provide an opportunity to observe such bending. So go out during the next solar
eclipse, and see whether or not starlight is bent. The observation may not be
trivial, but it does sound reasonably straightforward.
But in fact the bending of starlight case, as with most real examples from
science, is very complicated. For example, the mathematics involved in Einstein’s
general theory of relativity are quite complex, sufﬁciently complex that without
simplifying assumptions being made, it would not have been possible to make the
calculations required to predict the positions of bent versus unbent starlight. So a
good number of simplifying assumptions – and assumptions known to be
incorrect – had to be made. In the actual observations in May of 1919, in order
to make the calculations manageable, the sun was treated as a perfectly spherical,
nonrotating body, with no outside inﬂuences acting on it (such as the gravitational
effects of bodies such as the Earth, moon, and other planets). Of course, in fact the
sun is not spherical, and it rotates, and there are any number of outside inﬂuences
acting on it. In short, everyone knew these assumptions were wrong, but everyone
also knew that, without making such simplifying assumptions, the necessary
calculations could not be done.
Most (not all, but most) of those familiar with the bent starlight observations of
1919 agree that these simplifying assumptions did not change the overall
implication of the observation, namely, that the observation provided conﬁrming
evidence for Einstein’s theory. Nonetheless, the point I am trying to drive home is
that actual cases of conﬁrming evidence tend to involve factors that are far more
complex than are generally recognized. (I should also note that I have only
touched upon a few of the complicating factors in the bending of starlight case.
There were many more. If you are interested in following up on this case,
additional readings are suggested in the Chapter Notes.)
This situation is not unusual. More often than not, checking to see if a
prediction is or is not observed involves layers of nontrivial theories and data.
In short, actual cases of conﬁrming evidence are usually very complex. So not only
does the inductive nature of conﬁrmation reasoning mean that such reasoning

39

40

Fundamental Issues

cannot prove (in a certain strong sense of “prove”) a theory is correct, but in
addition, the actual evidence and reasoning tends to be intertwined in complex
ways, such that cases of conﬁrming evidence are usually far less straightforward
than they might at ﬁrst appear to be.
If it is not possible to prove (again, in the strong sense of the word) that a theory
is correct, is it at least possible to prove that some theories are incorrect? At ﬁrst
glance, the answer would appear to be yes. After all, disconﬁrmation reasoning is a
type of deductive reasoning, and, as noted above, in good deductive reasoning the
premises guarantee the conclusion. So, at ﬁrst glance, one would think that
disconﬁrmation reasoning could be used to prove a theory is incorrect. But as is so
often the case, ﬁrst impressions are misleading.
Consider this example to illustrate why disconﬁrmation reasoning is not as
straightforward as it may seem. Anyone who has taken a lab course (for example,
in chemistry or biology) will have had an experience similar to the following.
Suppose in a chemistry lab your professor gives you a beaker of ethanol, and
instructs you to ﬁnd its boiling point. Now suppose (when the professor is not
looking, of course) that you sneak a peek into any of a number of standard
reference texts, and ﬁnd that the boiling point of ethanol is 78.5 degrees Celsius.
Now you perform your experiment, conﬁdent that the boiling point will turn out
to be 78.5 degrees Celsius. Unfortunately, it turns out that the sample does not
seem to boil at 78.5 degrees Celsius. What do you do?
This appears to be a case where disconﬁrmation reasoning would apply. The
reasoning scheme for disconﬁrmation reasoning would lead you to reason as
follows:
If the sample in the beaker is ethanol, then I should observe the sample
boiling at 78.5 degrees Celsius.
I do not observe the sample boiling at 78.5 degrees Celsius.
so

The sample in the beaker is not ethanol.

At this point, do you conclude that the professor was mistaken, and that the
beaker does not contain ethanol? Almost certainly not. Instead, you will likely
consider alternative explanations of why the boiling point did not turn out to be
78.5 degrees Celsius. For example, a broken thermometer, or dirty glassware, or a
contaminated sample, or unusual air pressure in the lab, or any of a number of
other explanations are possible. In short, it would be bad practice to jump to a
conclusion based on the small amount of evidence you have.
Your reasoning in this case is more accurately characterized as follows:
If the sample in the beaker is ethanol, and the thermometer is working
properly, and my glassware is clean, and the sample is not contaminated, and
the air pressure in the lab is normal, and (any of a number of other
alternatives), then I should observe the sample boiling at 78.5 degrees Celsius.
I do not observe the sample boiling at 78.5 degrees Celsius.
so The sample in the beaker is not ethanol, or my thermometer is not
working properly, or my glassware is not clean, or the sample is contami­
nated, or the air pressure in the lab is unusual, or (any of a number of other
alternatives).

4 Conﬁrming and Disconﬁrming Evidence and Reasoning

The moral is that disconﬁrmation reasoning, as schematically represented
above, was vastly oversimpliﬁed. As we are seeing, disconﬁrmation reasoning is
more accurately schematically represented as follows:
If T, and A1, and A2, and A3, . . . , and An, then O
Not O
so Not T, or not A1, or not A2, or not A3, . . . , or not An
This is a more accurate representation, and hereafter is what I will have in mind
when I speak of disconﬁrmation reasoning.
In the scheme above, A1, A2, and so on, represent what are commonly called
auxiliary hypotheses. Auxiliary hypotheses are crucial, but usually unstated, parts
of any instance of disconﬁrmation reasoning. Auxiliary hypotheses are crucial
simply because, without them, we would not expect to get the observation in
question. To put the point slightly differently, auxiliary hypotheses are what, in a
sense, are needed to get the “then” part of the statement from the “if” part. That is,
if such and such is the case, and all the auxiliary hypotheses are correct, then we
would expect to observe so and so.
And as the case of the beaker of ethanol illustrates, in any situation where a
theory is used to make a prediction that turns out to be incorrect, it is always
possible (indeed, in many cases it is likely) that the theory is ﬁne and that one or
more of the auxiliary hypotheses are mistaken.
The same situation with auxiliary hypotheses arose (and is still present) in
the cold fusion example. It is true, for example, that the large number of
neutrons one would expect to observe from cold fusion were in fact not
observed. But the expected large number of neutrons depends on the auxiliary
hypothesis that the processes involved in cold fusion are more or less similar
to the processes involved in usual (hot) fusion. The proponents of the theory
had the option – and indeed, they took this option – of retaining their belief in
cold fusion and instead rejecting the auxiliary hypothesis that cold fusion is
like usual fusion.
In the case of cold fusion theory, eventually the quantity of disconﬁrming
evidence increased to the point where there are now relatively few who still accept
cold fusion theory (though, notably, there are still those who continue to adhere to
cold fusion theory and reject the ever-available auxiliary hypotheses). But, in
general, the question of when it is more reasonable to reject a theory in the face of
disconﬁrming evidence, and when instead it is more reasonable to reject one or
more of the auxiliary hypotheses, is an extraordinarily difﬁcult one. And impor­
tantly, there is no recipe for answering it.
In short, then, here are the two most important points about disconﬁrming
evidence and reasoning. First, when one is faced with evidence that seems to
disconﬁrm a theory, it is not only an option, but indeed it is often more
reasonable, to maintain one’s belief in the theory and instead reject one of the
auxiliary hypotheses. And second, the question of when it is more reasonable to
reject a theory, and when instead it is more reasonable to reject one or more of the
auxiliary hypotheses, is not a question that can be answered by applying any cut­
and-dried recipe.

41

42

Fundamental Issues

Concluding Remarks
To summarize the main points of this chapter: conﬁrmation and disconﬁrmation
reasoning are two common types of reasoning, both within and outside of science.
Conﬁrmation reasoning, simply in light of the fact that it is a type of inductive
reasoning, can never show beyond a doubt that a theory is correct. Thus, no matter
how much conﬁrming evidence there is for a scientiﬁc theory, it will always remain
possible that the theory is wrong. In addition, the inductive evidence and reasoning
at play in actual cases is generally complex and intertwined. Conﬁrming evidence
and reasoning tends to be far less straightforward than it appears at ﬁrst sight.
On the other hand, disconﬁrmation reasoning is a type of deductive reasoning.
However, actual instances of disconﬁrming evidence also tend to be complex. In
particular, there are usually a substantial number of auxiliary hypotheses involved
in disconﬁrmation reasoning. Thus, disconﬁrming evidence shows only that
either the theory in question is wrong, or (as is often the case) one or more
of the auxiliary hypotheses are incorrect. Thus, disconﬁrming evidence and
reasoning are likewise far less straightforward than they might at ﬁrst appear.
Conﬁrmation and disconﬁrmation reasoning are used every day, both within
and outside of science, and as we have seen, issues involving such reasoning are
complex. In later chapters, especially in Parts II and III, we will see how the points
discussed above have played and continue to play substantial roles in the history
of science. But before turning to that material, we will ﬁrst, in the next chapter,
explore some additional issues that are closely tied to the topics discussed above,
these being the Quine–Duhem thesis and issues surrounding scientiﬁc method.

43

5
The Quine–Duhem Thesis and Implications for
Scientiﬁc Method
In the previous chapters, we looked at worldviews, truth, facts, and reasoning, as
well as a number of issues related to these topics. As we will see in this chapter,
many of those issues have close ties to what is often referred to as the Quine–
Duhem thesis (or, sometimes, the Duhem–Quine thesis, to reﬂect the fact that
Duhem preceded Quine). The Quine–Duhem thesis is one of the better-known
views in modern philosophy of science, and for this reason alone is worth looking
into. But in addition, it will give us an opportunity to better see the ways in which
the issues discussed in previous chapters are intertwined, and moreover, this
discussion will help set the stage for later chapters, where we will see how these
intertwined issues play out in examples from the history of science.
Also worth noting is that these issues have substantial implications for various
views on scientiﬁc method. Toward the end of the chapter, then, we will consider
various proposals that have been suggested concerning scientiﬁc method. This
section on scientiﬁc method will do double duty: ﬁrst, it will allow us to see,
historically, some of the views presented on the proper way to conduct science.
For example, we will see how the Aristotelian approach to science differed
substantially from what is typically taken now as the proper sort of approach.
And second, discussing scientiﬁc method will give us a chance to see issues
surrounding methodology in science, and this in turn will be useful for later
chapters, where we will see the (often surprising) methods used in cases from the
history of science.

The Quine–Duhem Thesis
The Quine–Duhem thesis is a well-known view in the philosophy of science, and
one involving a number of intertwined and controversial issues. By way of a brief
introduction to the principle players, Pierre Duhem (1861–1916) was a wellrespected French physicist, and one who had substantial interests in broader
questions, including questions involved in the testing of scientiﬁc hypotheses and
theories. Willard Quine (1908–2000) was one of the most inﬂuential philosophers
of the twentieth century, and he had a lifelong interest in issues surrounding the
philosophy of science.
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

44

Fundamental Issues

In this section, we will look at three of the key ideas associated with the Quine–
Duhem thesis, namely, the idea that (to borrow a phrase from Quine) our beliefs
face the “tribunal of experience” not singly, but in a body; the claim that there can
typically be no “crucial experiments” to decide which of two competing theories is
correct; and the notion of underdetermination, that is, the idea that the available
data typically does not pick out a unique theory as being correct.
Bodies of beliefs and the tribunal of experience
Recall from our discussion in the previous chapter that, when faced with
disconﬁrming evidence, there are almost always crucial (but usually unstated)
auxiliary hypotheses involved. As we saw in the previous chapter, it is always
possible to reject an auxiliary hypothesis rather than rejecting the main view.
Given the role played by auxiliary hypotheses, when we perform an experiment,
presumably to test a particular hypothesis, we are not really testing just the
individual hypothesis. Rather, in an important sense the test is more of a test of the
main hypothesis plus the accompanying auxiliary hypotheses. So what we are
typically testing is really a body of claims, any one of which can be rejected or
modiﬁed in the face of disconﬁrming evidence. And this is one of the key elements
of the Quine–Duhem thesis – that is, the key idea is that a hypothesis typically
cannot be tested in isolation. Rather, what is tested is an entire group of claims, any
of which is available for rejection or modiﬁcation should the experimental results
not be as expected. And this is the key idea behind Quine’s phrase noted above, that
our beliefs face the tribunal of experience not individually, but as a body.
The emphasis here on bodies of claims brings to mind our discussion of
worldviews from Chapter 1. And indeed, this aspect of the Quine–Duhem thesis
is closely tied to the notion of worldviews. To see this, recall our discussion of
interconnected systems of beliefs from Chapter 1, in which we discussed such
collections of beliefs by an analogy with jigsaw puzzles. Quine tended to speak of
such collections of beliefs as “webs of beliefs,” suggesting an analogy with a
spider’s web. In a spider’s web, changes in the outer regions of a web affect the
more central regions in only minor ways. Likewise, beliefs toward the outer edge
of a “web of beliefs” can be modiﬁed with only minor alterations of more central
beliefs (such beliefs would be the peripheral beliefs we discussed in Chapter 1). In
contrast, changes in the central regions of a web will cause changes throughout
the web, and, in a similar way, modiﬁcations to central beliefs (the core beliefs)
will cause changes throughout one’s web of beliefs.
We noted above that, according to the Quine–Duhem thesis, tests of a
hypothesis are typically not tests of the individual hypothesis, but rather are
tests of groups or collections of beliefs. How large a group of beliefs are we
speaking of here? For example, if we design an experiment to test a hypothesis,
how large a collection of beliefs are we really testing? Are we testing just a
relatively small subset of our overall collection (or jigsaw puzzle) of beliefs, or
much more radically, is every experiment and test we perform in some sense
really a test of our entire jigsaw puzzle, our entire worldview?
There is no consensus on the answers to these questions. Quine at times
defended the more radical view, maintaining that it is one’s entire web of

5 The Quine–Duhem Thesis and Implications for Scientiﬁc Method

beliefs – that is, our entire interconnected collection of beliefs – that face the
tribunal of experience as a whole. And faced with evidence that runs counter
to views we hold, no belief, even a core belief, is immune from revision. We
would, of course, typically be more willing to modify beliefs that are more
toward the periphery, but Quine’s point is that in principle any belief is subject
to revision. Tests are tests of the whole package. Duhem, on the other hand,
was a bit more reserved on this point in that, on his view, although tests might
involve large collections of beliefs, it is not typically our entire collection of
beliefs – our entire worldview – that is put to the test.
In spite of the differences in the details between Quine’s and Duhem’s views,
there is general agreement that the overall point is correct; that is, that tests are
not typically tests of a hypothesis in isolation, but rather, tests are typically tests of
large bodies of beliefs. And as noted, this is generally taken as a key component of
the Quine–Duhem thesis.
Crucial experiments
Another aspect of the Quine–Duhem thesis, and one closely related to what we
have just been discussing, involves the notion of crucial experiments in science.
The idea of a crucial experiment goes back at least to Francis Bacon (1561–1626),
the idea being that, when faced with two competing theories, it should be possible
to design a crucial experiment for which the two theories give conﬂicting
predictions. Ideally, since the predictions of the competing theories conﬂict,
such an experiment should show at least one of the theories to be mistaken.
Because of the issues involved in conﬁrmation reasoning discussed in the previous
chapter (mainly that conﬁrming evidence can at best support a theory, but not
show deﬁnitely that the theory is correct), such an experiment would not show
that the theory making the correct prediction was deﬁnitely the correct theory.
Nonetheless, the key idea is that a crucial experiment, even if it could not show
one of the competing theories to be deﬁnitely correct, could at least serve to rule
out one of the competing theories.
However, if tests are typically tests of collections of beliefs, and if when faced
with disconﬁrming evidence it is always an option to reject an auxiliary hypothesis
rather than the main theory, then it seems that crucial experiments will typically
not be possible. The reason should be clear: in any such experiment designed to
show that at least one of the two competing theories gives a wrong prediction,
whichever theory seems to make the wrong prediction can still be kept, simply by
rejecting one of the auxiliary hypotheses. And again, as we noted in the previous
chapter, it is often perfectly reasonable to reject an auxiliary hypothesis rather
than the main theory.
It is worth noting that this skepticism about the possibility of crucial experi­
ments can be understood in a variety of ways, some much stronger and more
controversial than others. There is little question that, in some cases, results of
experiments for which competing theories give conﬂicting predictions can be
accommodated within both of the conﬂicting theories. For example, the lack of
observed neutrons during early cold fusion experiments was clearly compatible
with the usual theories about fusion, but as we saw in the previous chapter, this

45

46

Fundamental Issues

result could also be accommodated within cold fusion theory by rejecting one of
the auxiliary hypotheses involved. If we take the Quine–Duhem skepticism about
crucial experiments in a relatively weak sense, as claiming only that competing
theories can often both accommodate the results of an alleged crucial experiment,
then the claim is reasonably uncontroversial. There are numerous examples from
the history of science (the cold fusion example above being just one) that support
this weaker version of the claim.
Another reading of this aspect of the Quine–Duhem thesis, in which this part of
the thesis is construed as claiming that any experimental result whatsoever can be
accommodated within any theory whatsoever, is a much stronger and much more
controversial version of the thesis. It is much more difﬁcult to ﬁnd clear examples
from the history of science to support this stronger claim. However, Quine did
sometimes speak this way, and, not surprisingly, there is far less consensus on this
stronger claim.
So to summarize this brief subsection: one aspect of the Quine–Duhem thesis
involves a certain skepticism about the idea of crucial experiments. And there is
general consensus that in some sense this is correct, that is, there are cases of
competing theories where it does not seem possible to design a deﬁnitive crucial
experiment. But there is far less consensus on the stronger interpretation, that is,
there is far less consensus concerning the suggestion that any experimental result
whatever can be accommodated within any theory.
The underdetermination of theories
One other often-discussed issue in the philosophy of science is generally termed
the underdetermination of theories. Recall again from the discussion above that
theories can generally be preserved in the face of disconﬁrming evidence, and that
generally it will be difﬁcult if not impossible to design a crucial experiment to
decide between competing theories. Add to this our discussion of conﬁrming
evidence from the preceding chapter, especially where we noted that, given the
inductive nature of conﬁrming evidence, such evidence can at best support a
theory, but never demonstrate conclusively that a theory is correct.
Putting all these factors together, we arrive at the view that the available data,
including the outcomes of all relevant experiments, can never fully determine that
a particular theory is the correct theory. Nor can all the data and experimental
results ever show deﬁnitively that any competing theory is incorrect. In short, a
variety of competing theories will often be compatible with all the available
evidence. This is often summarized by saying that theories are underdetermined
by the available data.
It is worth noting that, as with the aspects of the Quine–Duhem thesis we
discussed above, the notion of underdetermination can be read in a variety of
ways, some stronger and more controversial than others. There is no question
that, at times, the available data does not uniquely point toward one of two or
more competing theories. To use the cold fusion example again, in the late 1980s
the data simply did not point cleanly toward either the cold fusion theory or the
existing hot fusion theory (that is, the usual view of fusion as requiring extremely
high temperatures). Both the cold fusion and hot fusion theories were compatible

5 The Quine–Duhem Thesis and Implications for Scientiﬁc Method

with the available data. Understood in this relatively mild way, there is little
question that theories are underdetermined in this sense.
At the other end of the spectrum, in contrast to this mild sense of underdetermination, it is not uncommon to see discussions involving a much more
radical notion. On this much more radical view of underdetermination, scientiﬁc
theories and scientiﬁc knowledge are viewed as “social constructs,” more or less
inventions of the relevant community. According to this view, scientiﬁc theories
are seen as more closely tied to, and reﬂections of, social conditions rather than
being tied to, and reﬂections of, the physical world. On this much more radical
and controversial notion of underdetermination, there is no more a uniquely
determined and objectively correct scientiﬁc theory than there is a uniquely
determined and objectively correct set of table manners. On this view, table
manners and scientiﬁc theories are both reﬂections of society, and one theory
cannot be said to be the uniquely correct theory in any deep or objective sense of
the word “correct.”
In short, although there is agreement that the underdetermination of theories is
a key aspect of the Quine–Duhem thesis, the notion of underdetermination is
construed in a variety of ways. And as noted, some of these ways are substantially
stronger and more controversial than others.
In summary, consider again the key issues associated with the Quine–Duhem
thesis – the underdetermination of theories, the idea that hypotheses are
typically not tested in isolation, and the notion that crucial experiments are
typically not possible. All of these are reasonably uncontroversial, at least when
construed in a somewhat mild way. How broadly such claims should be
construed, and whether such broader claims can be supported by actual cases,
is much more controversial. Watch for these sorts of issues as we discuss, in
Part II, historical cases such as that involving the dispute over the Earthcentered and sun-centered views of the universe. As we will see, such disputes
involve a surprisingly wide range of issues, including those central to the
Quine–Duhem thesis.

Implications for Scientiﬁc Method
As mentioned earlier, the sorts of issues we have been discussing have interesting
implications for views on scientiﬁc method. Before closing this chapter, then, we
will look brieﬂy at a variety of proposals that have been made concerning the
proper way to conduct science. This will allow us to see how scientiﬁc method was
viewed within the Aristotelian worldview (and especially note how much it differs
from the way scientiﬁc method is typically viewed today). These discussions will
also help set the stage for our discussion, in Part II, of cases from the history
of science.
At some point in your education, you may well have been taught what is
commonly termed “the scientiﬁc method.” Although the exact formulation of this
method varies somewhat from book to book, and from school to school, in
general terms this method is generally presented as one that involves (a) gathering
the relevant facts, (b) generating hypotheses to explain those facts, and (c) testing

47

48

Fundamental Issues

the hypotheses, typically by performing experiments that either conﬁrm or
disconﬁrm (using something like the patterns of conﬁrmation and dis­
conﬁrmation reasoning discussed earlier) the hypotheses.
Given our earlier discussions, especially concerning the nature of facts from
Chapter 3, of conﬁrmation and disconﬁrmation reasoning in the previous
chapter, and of issues associated with the Quine–Duhem thesis discussed above,
we might reasonably wonder whether the method just outlined could possibly be
as straightforward as it is often presented to be. In what follows, we will look at
some of the methods that have been proposed for doing science, and we will also
explore some of the issues surrounding such methods. We will by no means be
surveying every proposed scientiﬁc method, but we will look at enough to get a
good idea of some of the factors complicating any attempt to give a single,
deﬁnitive method for doing science. Let’s begin with a look at some of Aristotle’s
ideas on the subject.
Aristotle’s axiomatic approach
Within the Aristotelian worldview, science was generally viewed as geared
toward generating knowledge that was certain. That is, it was generally thought
that scientiﬁc knowledge had to be necessarily true, and not merely probable. If
we ask how we might arrive at such necessarily true knowledge, there seems
only one possible approach, and that is to use deductive reasoning that is based
on necessarily true basic principles. If such necessarily true basic principles
could be found, and if the reasoning used is deductive, then the conclusions
(that is, the scientiﬁc knowledge) would “inherit” the certainty of the basic
principles, so to speak, and we would thus arrive at necessarily true scientiﬁc
knowledge.
Such approaches are often termed axiomatic approaches – that is, these are
approaches based on deductive reasoning from basic principles that are in
some sense certain or necessarily true. Aristotle was an advocate of such an
approach, and during the period in which the Aristotelian worldview was
dominant, the Aristotelian approach to scientiﬁc knowledge was generally
viewed as the correct approach. Looking at Aristotle’s approach, then, will give
us an idea of the sort of scientiﬁc method dominant for much of (at least
recorded) western history, and also give a good sense of the fundamental
problems that will be faced by any attempt to generate necessarily true
scientiﬁc knowledge.
Aristotle viewed logic as a tool to be used in investigations, including (but not
limited to) scientiﬁc investigations. In fact, for Aristotle, providing a scientiﬁc
explanation was essentially a matter of providing a certain sort of logical
argument. We typically do not view scientiﬁc explanations and logical arguments
as all that similar, but in fact they are closely related. To illustrate this, consider
the following example. (The example is chosen for ease of explanation, and since
it uses notions discovered well after the time of Aristotle, it is not one that
Aristotle himself would have or could have given.)
Suppose you are curious as to why copper conducts electricity. Suppose
someone explains that copper contains free electrons, and that things with

5 The Quine–Duhem Thesis and Implications for Scientiﬁc Method

free electrons conduct electricity, and that’s why copper conducts electricity. Note
how closely related this explanation is to the following argument:
All copper contains free electrons.
All things containing free electrons conduct electricity.
so All copper conducts electricity.
In fact, aside from the style of presentation, there is little difference between the
explanation given in the preceding paragraph, and the argument given immedi­
ately above.
Arguments of the sort just given, consisting of two premises and a conclusion,
are termed syllogisms. For Aristotle, a proper scientiﬁc explanation consisted of
a demonstration, which in essence is a chain of syllogisms in which the
conclusion of the ﬁnal syllogism is the item that is being explained. (I should
note that, strictly speaking, Aristotelian syllogisms are two-premise arguments
meeting certain conditions as to the form and arrangement of the statements
involved. Likewise, strictly speaking, there are more conditions on a demon­
stration than those just mentioned. However, these additional details need not
concern us here.)
As noted, for Aristotle, scientiﬁc knowledge had to be certain knowledge. Or to
put it another way, the conclusion of the ﬁnal syllogism in the chain had to be
necessarily true. Note how this differs importantly from the modern conception
of scientiﬁc knowledge. Science is now generally viewed as producing theories
that are probably correct, but we do not expect science to guarantee that theories
are correct (nor do we think that this is possible). Not so for Aristotle, nor for the
typical view of scientiﬁc knowledge up until the 1600s. Scientiﬁc knowledge was
to be certain knowledge, and the certainty was tied importantly to its being
derived deductively.
But how might such a deduction guarantee that the conclusion is not merely
true, but necessarily true? As noted, there is only one way, and that is to use
premises that are themselves necessarily true, so that the conclusion inherits, so to
speak, the certainty of the premises.
But this raises the question as to where the necessity of the premises comes
from. One solution would be to derive such premises, via other syllogisms higher
in the chain of syllogisms, from other premises that were themselves necessarily
true. And indeed, this is the way Aristotle envisions a full scientiﬁc explanation as
proceeding. That is, in the chain of syllogisms, the ﬁnal syllogism will consist of a
conclusion that is necessarily true because it has been derived from premises that
are necessarily true. And these premises typically will themselves be conclusions
of syllogisms earlier in the chain, in which the premises of these earlier syllogisms
are necessarily true.
Of course, the chain of syllogisms cannot go on forever, so at some point there
must be some premises that are necessarily true, but that have not themselves
been derived from earlier syllogisms. These starting points, the premises that are
necessarily true in and of themselves, are typically termed ﬁrst principles. First
principles are envisioned as basic, necessarily true facts about the world. But how
does one recognize ﬁrst principles, and, in particular, how does one know a ﬁrst
principle is necessarily true? An analogy with geometry might be helpful.

49

50

Fundamental Issues

Figure 5.1 Illustration of Euclidean axiom.

Consider the axiom of Euclidean geometry that given a line on a plane, and a
point on the plane not on that line, one and only one line can be drawn on the
plane through the point parallel to the given line. This axiom is illustrated in
Figure 5.1. In the ﬁgure, the paper represents the plane, the solid line at the top
represents the given line, the point is the point on the plane, and the dotted line
represents the one line that can be drawn through the point parallel to the given
line. This axiom cannot be proven in Euclidean geometry, and thus it (or an axiom
equivalent to the way it is phrased here) is taken as a basic, unproved starting
point (that is, an axiom or postulate) of Euclidean geometry. Although the claim
cannot be proven, it seems that if one has adequate education and intelligence,
and an understanding of the terms and concepts involved, then one can simply
“see” that this axiom must be true. (Incidentally, the discovery, in the 1800s, of
non-Euclidean geometries casts serious doubt on whether it makes sense to talk
about such axioms being “true” in any meaningful sense.)
In a way somewhat similar to the way that we presumably “see” the truth of
axioms such as the one illustrated above, if one has adequate education, intelli­
gence, and training, and a certain amount of scientiﬁc savvy, so to speak, then
according to Aristotle, one will simply “see” that certain basic facts about the
world are not only true, but necessarily true. And that, in outline, is how one
comes to see ﬁrst principles.
What you can probably see more clearly at this point is that this approach is
simply not going to work. The basic problem lies with the ﬁrst principles.
Consider again our discussions from our earlier chapters on worldviews, truth,
and empirical facts and philosophical/conceptual facts. Given what we saw in
those chapters, it is highly unlikely that there will ever be any such agreement on
what constitute basic facts, much less what might constitute basic facts that have
to be necessarily true. And so the basic problem with the sort of deductive
approach envisioned within Aristotle’s method lies with the very starting points of
that approach.
As noted, Aristotle envisioned science as resulting in theories and claims that
were not merely probable, but rather were certain. This sort of axiomatic
approach, based on necessarily true ﬁrst principles, seems the only way such
certain scientiﬁc knowledge might be achieved. And as you might guess, the
problem noted above, that is, the problem of ﬁnding agreed-upon, necessarily true
starting points, is going to be a general problem for all such approaches. Largely
for this reason, there is now general consensus that scientiﬁc claims and theories
cannot be guaranteed to be correct. And as we discussed in the previous chapter,
this is not a defect of science, but rather simply a consequence of the inductive

5 The Quine–Duhem Thesis and Implications for Scientiﬁc Method

nature of much of scientiﬁc reasoning. However, before moving on to consider
other approaches, one other axiomatic approach, that of Descartes, is worth
considering brieﬂy.
Descartes’ axiomatic approach
We discussed Descartes at the end of Chapter 2, where we saw that he was
interested in ﬁnding necessarily true beliefs to serve as a foundation on which to
build a structure of certain knowledge. In many ways, Descartes’ view of the
proper way to conduct science was similar to that of Aristotle (though Descartes
did not restrict himself to the purely syllogistic method taken by Aristotle). In
particular, Descartes too was interested in using deductive reasoning to derive
certain knowledge from necessarily true starting points.
Also as with Aristotle, much the same problem arose when Descartes
attempted to ﬁnd agreed-upon starting points. When dealing with starting points
that concern matters about the world, there simply do not seem to be any agreedupon basic principles about the world that we can know with certainty. And so
with respect to basic starting points concerning the world, Descartes’ approach is
going to run into essentially the same problem as that of Aristotle.
But as we saw in Chapter 2, at one point Descartes considered his own mind in
his search for necessarily true starting points. And as we saw in that chapter, there
is a case to be made that his “I am, I exist” is necessarily true. So Descartes may
have found at least one (generally) agreed-upon, necessarily true belief to serve as
a starting point.
However, as we also discussed at the end of Chapter 2, the basic problem with
this is simply that it is not enough of a foundation. In short, when searching for
necessarily true starting points concerning the world, Descartes had the same
problem as Aristotle, namely, there seem to be no such agreed-upon, necessarily
true starting points. And although there is probably more agreement that one can
ﬁnd at least some certainty in the proposition that one exists (at least as a thinking
thing), this proves too slim a foundation on which to build.
Popper’s falsiﬁcationism
Karl Popper (1902–94) is the best-known advocate of what is generally termed the
falsiﬁcationist approach. Popper himself did not take falsiﬁcationism as being a
deﬁnitive scientiﬁc method; in fact, he did not think there was a single deﬁnitive
scientiﬁc method. He did, though, view falsiﬁcation as a key element of science,
and a key criterion by which to distinguish scientiﬁc theories from nonscientiﬁc
theories. In what follows, we will look at an outline of Popper’s views.
In general, Popper argued that science should emphasize the attempted
refutation of theories rather than emphasizing the conﬁrmation of theories.
According to Popper, it is too easy to ﬁnd conﬁrming evidence for many theories.
To use one of Popper’s examples, consider Freudian psychoanalysis. According to
Popper, “predictions” made by this theory are general enough that almost any
events could be interpreted as instances of conﬁrmation. And thus, according to
Popper, conﬁrming evidence for such theories is simply not of much interest.

51

52

Fundamental Issues

In contrast, consider Einstein’s theory of relativity. As we noted early in
Chapter 4, Einstein’s relativity theory predicted that starlight should be bent
when passing near a massive body such as the sun. And since such bending of
starlight, if it indeed occurred, could be observed during a solar eclipse, Einstein’s
theory made a speciﬁc dramatic prediction not made by any competing theory. In
making such a dramatic prediction, and one that could fairly easily be shown to be
incorrect, Einstein’s theory was, in this way, taking a substantial risk.
In a certain sense, for Popper, the riskier a theory is, the more scientiﬁc it is. For
example, for the reasons just mentioned (that is, that Einstein’s theory made a
speciﬁc and dramatic prediction and hence was at risk of quickly being shown to
be wrong), Einstein’s theory is a much better example of a scientiﬁc theory than is,
say, Freudian psychoanalysis. And in general, for Popper this was the hallmark of
good science – science should emphasize falsiﬁcation over conﬁrmation, and
should strive for at-risk theories.
As noted, Popper did not place great emphasis on conﬁrming evidence. For
Popper, what characterized a successful scientiﬁc theory was not that it had great
amounts of conﬁrming evidence; rather, what characterized a successful scientiﬁc
theory was that it had survived repeated attempts to refute it via the testing of
speciﬁc dramatic predictions. And this sort of falsiﬁcationist approach, that is,
placing the emphasis on trying to falsify theories rather than conﬁrm them, is
central to Popper’s view.
This is a fairly brief outline of Popper’s views, but it should be sufﬁcient to give a
sense of the approach he favored. And as you might guess, the issues we discussed
earlier concerning disconﬁrmation reasoning, as well as the issues noted in the
discussion of the Quine–Duhem thesis, are especially relevant here. As we noted
earlier, seeming cases of disconﬁrmation are rarely if ever as simple as they
appear. Rather, where a prediction made by a theory does not come out as
expected, it is always an option, and indeed it is often more reasonable, to reject an
auxiliary hypothesis rather than the main theory. In short, although there is no
question that cases of disconﬁrming evidence play important roles in science, the
issues surrounding such evidence are sufﬁciently complex to make it unlikely that
disconﬁrmation – that is, falsiﬁcation – can serve as the central feature of science.
The hypothetico-deductive method
One often sees reference to what has come to be called the hypothetico-deductive
method, and given how prominent such references are, the hypothetico-deductive
method is certainly worth discussing here. But our discussion can be brief, since at
bottom the hypothetico-deductive method does not involve much beyond issues
we have already discussed.
The basic idea behind the hypothetico-deductive method is that from a
hypothesis or set of hypotheses (or theories, broadly speaking) one deduces
observational consequences, and then tests to see if those observational conse­
quences are observed. If so, then for the reasons discussed earlier in the discussion
of conﬁrmation reasoning, this is taken as support for the hypothesis. If the
observational consequences are not observed, then again for the reasons

5 The Quine–Duhem Thesis and Implications for Scientiﬁc Method

discussed earlier in the context of disconﬁrmation reasoning, this is taken as
evidence against the hypothesis.
A quick note: the hypothetico-deductive method is not generally concerned
with how the hypotheses themselves are generated, but rather with the justiﬁca­
tion or conﬁrmation of hypotheses. In the philosophy of science, this distinction
(between how hypotheses are generated versus how hypotheses are justiﬁed or
conﬁrmed) is usually described as the difference between the context of discovery
versus the context of justiﬁcation. The context of discovery is generally regarded
as the more complex of the two, and as we will see in later chapters, the ways in
which actual hypotheses or theories are developed are surprisingly varied and
complex. However, as we are seeing, even the context of justiﬁcation – that is,
roughly speaking, how we go about justifying or conﬁrming hypotheses or
theories – is plenty complex by itself.
There is no question that conﬁrmation and disconﬁrmation reasoning play
important roles in science. Given the close ties between these patterns of
reasoning and the hypothetico-deductive method, it is safe to say that this
method plays an important role in science. However, consider again the issues
we have discussed – the inductive nature of conﬁrmation reasoning, the possi­
bility of rejecting auxiliary hypotheses in the face of disconﬁrming evidence, the
underdetermination of theories, the difﬁculty if not impossibility of designing
crucial experiments, the notion that hypotheses are tested in groups rather than
singly, and so on. The view that science proceeds by a relatively simple process of
generating predictions from hypotheses and then accepting or rejecting hypoth­
eses depending on whether the prediction is observed seems, given what we have
discussed, to be at best an overly simplistic account of science.
Again, there is no question that the hypothetico-deductive method – that is,
essentially conﬁrmation and disconﬁrmation reasoning – plays an important role
in science. But given the issues explored earlier, although the hypothetico­
deductive method is a method used in science, it would be misleading to call
it the scientiﬁc method.

Concluding Remarks
The Quine–Duhem thesis, and issues surrounding the topic of scientiﬁc method,
illustrate some of the ways that issues in science and the philosophy of science are
intertwined, and intertwined in complex ways. As noted at the outset of this
chapter, our main goal was to get these issues on the table, so that we will be in a
position to appreciate the way such issues come into play in cases from the history
of science. We will be turning to such cases in Part II; however, before doing so we
need to consider a few more fundamental issues. We will turn next to some
puzzling issues involving inductive reasoning.

53

54

6
A Philosophical Interlude: Problems and Puzzles
of Induction
The issues discussed in Part I of this book are, by and large, issues involving basic
topics in the history and philosophy of science, and ones that provide background
material for topics explored in Parts II and III. In this chapter, we take a sort
of philosophical interlude. The problems and puzzles we explore here are
primarily philosophical, in the sense that they arose from and are mainly
discussed by philosophers, rather than being issues having a practical effect
on the everyday workings of science. These topics also provide something of an
interlude in the sense that, unlike the other topics of this part of the book, these
issues are not necessarily needed as background for material in later chapters.
Nonetheless, the problems and puzzles we discuss are of general interest, in that
they illustrate some deeply puzzling aspects of some of the reasoning that is most
basic to science.
I should mention that these issues do not tend to strike people, on ﬁrst hearing
of them, as deep or puzzling or profound. I recall my ﬁrst reaction to these
problems, when ﬁrst learning about them years ago, was along the lines of
thinking they seemed to consist mainly of philosophical nonsense. And they did
not initially strike me as deep or difﬁcult at all – my initial sense was that they
could all be resolved without a great deal of hard thought.
But after a while, one realizes that these problems do not admit of easy answers,
and that they raise issues that are deeply puzzling. My main goal in this chapter is
to introduce you to a few of these philosophical problems, all of which concern
inductive reasoning. I encourage you to let these problems simmer for a while,
and in so doing (one hopes) come to appreciate how puzzling these issues are. We
will, in particular, look at Hume’s problem of induction, Hempel’s raven paradox,
and Goodman’s new riddle of induction. We will begin with Hume’s problem.

Hume’s Problem of Induction
David Hume (1711–76) was apparently the ﬁrst to notice a puzzling aspect of
inductive reasoning, and his observation now is typically referred to as Hume’s
problem of induction. Understanding Hume’s point requires reaching one of
those “Aha . . .” moments. If you really grasp Hume’s point, you will see that it is
an extraordinarily puzzling point about our most common types of everyday
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

6 A Philosophical Interlude: Problems and Puzzles of Induction

reasoning, in particular, about inductive inferences concerning the future. Let’s
begin with a quick point about reasoning in general.
When we reason, for example, when we present or consider arguments, our
arguments almost always contain implied premises. Implied premises, as the
name suggests, are premises that are necessary in order for the reasoning to be
plausible, but that are implied rather than explicitly stated. For example, suppose
we agree to meet for lunch downtown this Sunday, but your car is in the shop and
you are not sure how you can get to the restaurant. Suppose I tell you that there is
a local bus that runs from your house to the restaurant, and so you can take the
bus to our lunch meeting. Implied in this informal bit of reasoning, but not
explicitly stated, is the premise that the buses run on Sundays. If we use brackets
to indicate implied premises, the reasoning can be summarized as follows:
There is a bus that runs from your house to the restaurant.
[The buses run on Sundays.]
so You can take the bus to our lunch meeting this Sunday.
Again, almost all reasoning contains implied premises, and there is nothing
particularly surprising or unusual about this fact.
As noted, Hume’s problem of induction concerns inferences involving the
future, so let’s now consider a typical inference about the future. Consider, for
example, the following perfectly ordinary piece of inductive reasoning:
so

In our past experience, the sun has always risen in the east.
In the future, the sun will probably continue to rise in the east.

Note the logical form of this piece of reasoning, which is:
so

In our past experience, has always (or at least regularly) occurred.
In the future, will probably continue to occur.

So far, there is nothing particularly unusual about this reasoning. We simply
have a typical inductive inference with a quite common logical form, of the sort
we use all the time. But Hume was apparently the ﬁrst to notice something
interesting about reasoning of this sort. In particular, Hume noticed that this sort
of reasoning contains the following implied, but crucial, premise:
The future will continue to be like the past.
Given this, and again using brackets to indicate implied premises, the reasoning
above is more accurately captured as:
In our past experience, the sun has always risen in the east.
[The future will continue to be like the past.]
so In the future, the sun will probably continue to rise in the east.
And more generally speaking, the form of reasoning noted above is better
captured as:
In our past experience, has always (or at least regularly) occurred.
[The future will continue to be like the past.]
so In the future, will probably continue to occur.

55

56

Fundamental Issues

The ﬁrst important point to note is how crucial this implied premise is to the
argument. This implied premise is necessary for any inference about the future
simply because, if the future does not continue to be like the past, then there is no
reason to think that past experience will be any guide to what future experience
will be like. In other words, if the statement noted above, that the future will
continue to be like the past, is not correct, then past experience is no guide to the
future. And so inferences about the future would not be reliable.
To further illustrate the importance of this implied premise, consider Robert
Heinlein’s novel Job. In this novel, the main characters continually wake up to ﬁnd
themselves in worlds that are slightly different from the world they inhabited the
day before. For example, one day they might wake up in a world in which the
monetary system is slightly different from the world of the day before (and hence
any money they have on them from the previous day is no longer worth anything).
One day they might inhabit a world in which everyone obeys trafﬁc laws, and the
next day they wake up in a world in which violating trafﬁc laws is the norm. And in
general, each day their world is different from the day before. Since the world they
inhabit is constantly changing, they don’t know what to expect from day to day.
For them, the future is not like the past. As a result, they are unable to make the
sorts of inductive inferences about the future that we take for granted. (About the
only inductive inference they can make about the future is that the future will not
continue to be like the past. And this, of course, is not a particularly helpful
inference.)
So the ﬁrst key point to recognize in understanding Hume’s problem of
induction is this: the statement noted above, that the future will continue to
be like the past, is a necessary, though generally unrecognized, implied premise in
every piece of reasoning we do about the future.
Now, if the statement “the future will continue to be like the past” is a
necessary implied premise in any reasoning about the future, then it is clear that
the degree of conﬁdence we have in inferences about the future depends crucially
on the degree of conﬁdence we have in this statement. The obvious next
question, then, is what reason do we have to think the future will continue to
be like the past?
Our main (perhaps only) reason for believing the future will continue to be like
the past seems to boil down to the fact that today was pretty much like yesterday
(heavy things still fall down today, the sun again rose in the east, day was followed
by night, and so on). Yesterday was pretty much like the day before it, and that day
was pretty much like the day before it, and so on. In short, in our past experience,
each day has tended to be more or less like the day before. And this seems to be
the basis for our believing that, in the future, things will be more or less like they
always have been. In short, if we ask the question “Why believe the future will
continue to be like the past?” the best reason we can give is summed up in the
following inference:
so

In our past experience, the future was like the past.
The future will probably continue to be like the past.

But note that this inference is an inference about the future. And again, any
inference about the future, including the inference immediately above, depends

6 A Philosophical Interlude: Problems and Puzzles of Induction

on the implied premise that the future will continue to be like the past. When this
implied premise is made clear, the inference above is better represented as:
In our past experience, the future was like the past.
[The future will continue to be like the past.]
so The future will probably continue to be like the past.
But this reasoning is blatantly circular. That is, this reasoning assumes, as one
of its premises, the very conclusion it is trying to establish. In other words, the
inference summarized above depends on the assumption that its own conclusion
is true. And that is obviously circular, and thus the reasoning provides no
justiﬁcation for accepting the conclusion.
In summary, Hume’s point is that every instance of inductive reasoning
depends upon the implied premise that the future will continue to be like the
past. But the main (and seemingly only) way to justify this implied premise is
circular, and hence it appears that this crucial implied premise cannot be justiﬁed.
In short, no inference about the future can be logically justiﬁed, so no inference
about the future provides any logical reason to believe its conclusion.
Before closing this section, a few ﬁnal comments are in order. First, note how
general Hume’s point is. It covers all inferences about the future, whether they are
garden-variety inferences (such as the sun rising in the east), or inferences about
scientiﬁc laws continuing to hold in the future, or beliefs about mathematics being
the same in the future as it has been in the past, and so on.
Second – and this is an important point in understanding him – Hume was not
trying to convince us that we ought not to make inferences about the future. He
thought that making inferences about the future is part of our natures – we can no
more stop making inferences about the future than we can voluntarily stop
breathing. His question was whether or not we can logically justify our inferences
about the future, and his answer was that we cannot.

Hempel’s Raven Paradox
Carl Hempel (1905–97) was an inﬂuential twentieth-century philosopher, work­
ing mainly in the philosophy of science. As you might guess, his raven paradox
was originally presented using ravens as an example, though it might be easier to
see the relevance of the paradox if we use a somewhat different example. Suppose
you and I are astronomers, and our main project involves gathering information
on quasars. As a brief background, quasars are a relatively recent discovery, with
the ﬁrst being discovered in the middle part of the twentieth century. Even after
over 50 years of research, not a great deal is known about quasars (though there
are some interesting and reasonably plausible theories about quasars that have
been developed recently). At any rate, some of the basic facts about quasars are
that they seem to emit an enormous amount of energy, and they all seem to be
located a great distance from Earth.
Now, suppose we are working in the early years of research on quasars. Suppose
we notice that the ﬁrst few quasars detected were all located a great distance from
Earth, and one question we become interested in is whether all quasars are located

57

58

Fundamental Issues

a great distance from Earth. As the years go on, we (and other astronomers)
continue to observe more quasars, and continue to note that every one we observe
is located far away. So far, so good. We seem to be dealing with a fairly common
situation, in which our observations are providing inductive support for the
statement “all quasars are located a great distance from Earth.”
There is nothing particularly puzzling about the situation described so far.
When we are considering a general statement, and we observe a good number of
instances that are in agreement with the statement, and none that run contrary to
it, we tend to take this as inductive support for the statement.
The puzzle arises, as Hempel noted, when we consider the logical structure of
general statements such as “all quasars are located a great distance from Earth.” A
general statement such as this is logically equivalent to its contrapositive, in this
case, to the statement “all objects not located a great distance from Earth are not
quasars.” In other words, the statement
a) All quasars are located a great distance from Earth.
and the statement
b) All objects not located a great distance from Earth are not quasars.
are logically equivalent statements.
We noted above that each time we observed a quasar that was located a great
distance from Earth (and again assuming we observe no instances running
contrary to the statement), each observation helps support the statement that
all quasars are located a great distance from Earth. To be consistent, then, each
time we observe an object not located a great distance from Earth that is not a
quasar, we have to accept that this observation supports (b), that is, that all objects
not located a great distance from Earth are not quasars.
This, too, by itself is not necessarily a problem or a puzzle. But now recall
what we noted above, namely, that (a) and (b) are equivalent. If (a) and (b) are
equivalent, then any support for (a) would have to count equally as support for
(b), and likewise, any support for (b) would have to count equally as support for
(a). And this gets right to the heart of the puzzle: whenever we have an
observation that supports (b), it seems that the observation must equally
support (a).
So, for example, the book in your hand is an object not located a great
distance from the Earth and is also not a quasar, so observing this book supports
(b). And for the reasons just noted, this observation should equally support (a).
But this seems just crazy – surely you cannot help conﬁrm a substantive
scientiﬁc claim about quasars by making a trivial observation about the book in
your hand.
As with Hume’s problem, do not misconstrue Hempel’s point. He is certainly
not claiming that a trivial observation about a book in front of you actually helps
support a substantive scientiﬁc claim about quasars. But he is pointing out that
there is something odd about what seems a very basic pattern of inductive
reasoning. Also, as noted above, Hempel’s raven paradox does not constitute a
practical problem, in that it is not generally a problem that affects the actual
conduct of science. But undoubtedly, inductive reasoning supporting general

6 A Philosophical Interlude: Problems and Puzzles of Induction

statements, such as that all quasars are located a great distance from the Earth, is
an important component of science. And Hempel’s raven paradox suggests that
there is something deeply puzzling about the nature of such reasoning.

Goodman’s Gruesome Problem
Hume’s problem of induction, discussed above, is now sometimes referred to as
the “old” riddle of induction, in contrast to the “new” riddle of induction put forth
by Nelson Goodman. Goodman (1906–98) was a broad-ranging philosopher, who
made notable contributions to ﬁelds including logic, epistemology, and the arts.
He was apparently the ﬁrst to notice another odd feature of certain types of
inductive reasoning, and here we focus just on this issue.
Consider a statement such as “all emeralds are green.” This statement seems to
be highly supported by experience, in particular, every emerald we have observed
has been green, and moreover, we have never observed an emerald that was not
green. With respect to emeralds, the predicate “green” would seem to be what
Goodman called a projectible predicate, that is, a predicate for which we can,
based on our past experience that all observed emeralds have been green, project
that in the future all observed emeralds will be green.
Now, deﬁne a new predicate, which Goodman named grue. There are a number
of ways to deﬁne grue, but for our purposes (and this follows Goodman’s
formulation fairly closely), say an object is grue if it is green and ﬁrst observed
before New Year’s Day 2050, or blue and ﬁrst observed after that day. As noted
above, all emeralds observed so far have been green, and none has failed to be
green. And again, this seems to give us some reason to think that any emeralds we
observe in the future will also be green.
But now note that every emerald observed so far was green and was ﬁrst observed
before New Year’s Day 2050. In other words, every single emerald observed so far
has been grue, and moreover, none has failed to be grue. So at least with respect to
emeralds observed so far, the inductive support for the statement that, in the future,
all observed emeralds will be green, is exactly the same as the inductive support for
the statement that, in the future, all observed emeralds will be grue.
But of course, we would never make the inference that, in the future, all
observed emeralds will be grue. That is, although we feel justiﬁed in thinking that
emeralds we observe in the future will continue to be green, we are sure that
emeralds observed in the future (in particular, those ﬁrst observed after New
Year’s Day 2050) will not be grue.
But if it is so obvious that emeralds observed after New Year’s Day 2050 will be
green, but not grue, there must be some difference between the predicate “green”
and the predicate “grue.” The former, to use the terminology mentioned above, is
what Goodman calls a projectible predicate (again, one for which we are justiﬁed
in projecting its application to emeralds into the future), but the latter is not a
projectible predicate. But in general, what is the difference between projectible
and nonprojectible predicates?
This question, which at ﬁrst glance seems as if it would be quite easy to address,
has proved to be difﬁcult. Of the responses that come immediately to mind – that

59

60

Fundamental Issues

predicates such as “grue” are constructed rather than “natural” predicates, that
unlike ordinary predicates they involve references to time, and so on – none has
withstood scrutiny. So although there are numerous suggestions for distinguishing
projectible from nonprojectible predicates, none of the suggestions has reached
anything that might be considered a consensus view.
As with Hume’s problem of induction, and Hempel’s raven paradox, it is
important not to misunderstand Goodman’s point. He is certainly not suggesting
that we should believe that all emeralds observed in the future will continue to be
grue. Obviously they will not. But given how obvious the difference between a
predicate such as “green” and a predicate such as “grue” seems to be, one would
think it would be easy to provide an account that plausibly captures the difference
between projectible and nonprojectible predicates. Goodman’s main question
was what that difference was. And as noted, even though the problem seems at
ﬁrst glance an easy one to solve, after decades of proposed solutions there is no
agreement that any of the proposals provide an adequate solution. So once again,
although Goodman’s new riddle of induction is certainly not a practical problem,
in that it does not affect the everyday workings of science, the problem raises
puzzling questions about inductive reasoning.

Concluding Remarks
As noted at the outset of this chapter, the issues discussed above are clearly
philosophical issues, rather than issues that affect working scientists. And they
tend to seem, at ﬁrst, to be problems that should be easy to solve. Yet the fact that
these problems resist solution, even after decades or more of extensive discussion,
suggests that there is something deeply puzzling about our most basic types of
inductive reasoning.
Also as noted at the beginning of this chapter, it generally takes some time to
fully appreciate these problems. With this in mind, I would encourage you to keep
these problems in the back of your mind, and let them simmer a while. In the
meantime, we will move on to discuss issues that will arise repeatedly in examples
from the history of science, these being issues surrounding the notion of
falsiﬁability.

61

7
Falsiﬁability
In this chapter, we introduce the notion of falsiﬁability. The issues surrounding
falsiﬁability appear, at ﬁrst glance, as if they could not be more simple or
straightforward. But in fact, especially when applied to real-life cases, they can
get quite complex. In this chapter, we will begin with a somewhat simpliﬁed
account of falsiﬁability, and then move on to consider some of the complicating
factors. In later chapters, especially as we examine cases from the history of
science, we will see examples of some of the more complex issues involving this
notion.

Basic Ideas
In a sense, falsiﬁability is perfectly straightforward. It is an attitude toward
theories. In particular, it is the attitude one has when one allows for the possibility
that a particular theory might be false. For example, suppose Sara is a physicist
who believes that the Big Bang theory of the origin of the universe is probably
correct. Suppose that, like most physicists, Sara is not dogmatic in her beliefs.
That is, if a sufﬁcient amount of new evidence came to light that provided
convincing reasons to think the Big Bang theory was not correct, then Sara would
be willing to give up her belief in the Big Bang theory. In short, although Sara
believes the Big Bang theory is correct, she is willing to admit that it might be false,
and so we say that she treats the theory as falsiﬁable.
In contrast, suppose Joe is a member of the Flat Earth Society. The Flat Earth
Society is a group whose members believe, quite sincerely, that the Earth is ﬂat.
Suppose Joe believes this. Moreover, no matter what evidence is presented that
suggests this theory is false, Joe ﬁnds some way around the evidence. For example,
suppose we point out that almost everyone believes the Earth is spherical. Joe
replies (perhaps not unreasonably) that popular opinion is no guide to the truth.
So we show Joe a photograph of the Earth that was taken from the international
space station. Joe replies that there is good reason to believe that the space
program is a complete fraud, that the photographs and television coverage have
been faked, and he expresses sympathy that we have been suckers for such
fraudulent reports. We argue that history books are ﬁlled with reports from
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

62

Fundamental Issues

voyagers who have circumnavigated the globe, and this is only possible if the Earth
is a sphere. Joe tells us about an article he recently read suggesting that, on a ﬂat
Earth, compass bearings would be skewed as one approached the periphery of the
Earth, and what probably happened to explorers such as Ferdinand Magellan was
that they sailed in a large circle around the periphery of a ﬂat Earth and, due to the
skewed compass bearings, they mistakenly thought they were sailing in a straight
line around the circumference of a sphere.
We soon realize that Joe will hold to his theory no matter how much evidence is
presented that suggests the theory is false. Unlike Sara, Joe appears unwilling to
admit that his theory might be false, and so it appears that Joe is treating the
theory as unfalsiﬁable.
When writing and speaking on falsiﬁability, authors tend to speak of falsiﬁ­
ability as if it were a characteristic of theories. That is, there is a prevalent but bad
habit of speaking of this or that theory as being falsiﬁable or unfalsiﬁable. But with
a little reﬂection, it should be clear that this is not the best way of speaking.
Generally, falsiﬁability is an attitude that a person might hold toward a particular
theory, rather than being a characteristic of the theory itself. For example,
consider again the ﬂat Earth theory. There is nothing about the ﬂat Earth theory
that makes the theory inherently unfalsiﬁable. We can easily imagine two
individuals, both believers in the ﬂat Earth theory, yet such that one becomes
convinced the theory is wrong while the other (like Joe above) refuses to abandon
the theory no matter how much evidence is presented. In each case the theory is
the same; what differs is the attitude of the individuals toward the theory. Thus, it
is generally not accurate to speak of a theory itself as being unfalsiﬁable; rather,
the crucial factor is one’s attitude toward the theory, and it is one’s attitude that
determines whether one is treating a theory as falsiﬁable or unfalsiﬁable.

Complicating Factors
At this point, the notion of falsiﬁability might seem like a pretty simple notion,
and the question of whether someone is treating a theory as falsiﬁable might seem
to be a straightforward question. But in many cases, especially those from the
history of science involving substantial changes in theories (for example, the
change from the Earth-centered to the sun-centered view), it is not at all easy to
say when theories are being treated as unfalsiﬁable. Let’s consider a few reasons
why this issue is difﬁcult.
In describing Sara above, we said that Sara was willing to give up the Big Bang
theory if there was a “sufﬁcient amount” of new evidence providing “convincing
reasons” that the theory was wrong. As discussed in Chapter 4, evidence against a
theory often comes in the form of predictions that turn out to be incorrect. That
is, when a theory is used to make predictions, and those predictions turn out to be
wrong, that poses a problem for the theory. However, also as discussed in Chapter
4, incorrect predictions are often the result of incorrect auxiliary hypotheses
rather than an incorrect theory. So when faced with incorrect predictions, it is
often more reasonable to reject one or more auxiliary hypotheses than to reject
the theory itself.

7 Falsiﬁability

Since one can (and often should) reject one or more auxiliary hypotheses, an
extremely difﬁcult question arises: what counts as a “sufﬁcient amount” of
evidence to reject a theory? At what point does one have “convincing reasons”
that a theory (rather than one or more auxiliary hypotheses) is wrong?
There are no clear answers to these questions. It is certainly unreasonable to
abandon a theory the ﬁrst time problems arise, but on the other hand, for some
theories there comes a time when the evidence against the theory reaches the
point where it would be unreasonable to continue to hold the theory.
The cold fusion example from Chapter 4 provides a good illustration of this.
Initially, in the late 1980s, there were some interesting experimental results
suggesting that fusion was indeed taking place at low temperatures. Moreover, the
two scientists reporting these results were by no means oddballs or “fringe”
scientists. These were well-respected, well-published, well-established scientists
reporting (although via the press rather than via mainstream scientiﬁc journals)
quite intriguing experimental results. However, in the ensuing months, problems
arose for the cold fusion theory. In particular, one could use cold fusion theory to
make certain predictions, and many of these predictions were not observed.
Initially, the supporters of cold fusion handled these problems by rejecting various
auxiliary hypotheses – the cold fusion apparatus was set up using incorrect
materials, the experimenters did not give the cold fusion apparatus sufﬁcient time
to “charge” itself, and so on. As the years went on, disconﬁrming evidence
continued to pile up. In addition, plausible alternative explanations of the initially
interesting results were offered. By the end of the 1990s, 10 years after the initial
cold fusion announcement, the dwindling number of cold fusion supporters were
forced to appeal to increasingly complicated auxiliary hypotheses. Such auxiliary
hypotheses included, for at least some defenders of the theory, that the problems
for cold fusion were the result of a conspiracy by large oil companies to suppress
new energy sources.
The point is that continuing to believe the cold fusion theory by rejecting
various auxiliary hypotheses was a reasonable thing to do initially. But by the time
one is appealing to conspiracy theories to save one’s theory, one has crossed the
line from reason to unreason. But, importantly, the line is not a precise, welldeﬁned line. And as a consequence, it is not a precise matter to say at what point
one is beginning to treat a theory as unfalsiﬁable.
These issues become even more difﬁcult when we recall earlier discussions on
evidence and worldviews. Consider again my acquaintance Steve, ﬁrst discussed
in the earlier chapter on truth. Steve takes an extremely literal interpretation of
certain passages from Vedic scriptures, and as a result of his beliefs about the
reliability of these scriptures, he believes that the moon is inhabited with
intelligent life, that the moon is further from the Earth than is the sun, and
that the Apollo moon landings were faked. I and my students have had numerous
discussions with Steve on these matters, generally in the form of presenting him
with evidence that his beliefs are wrong. Steve rejects all this evidence in favor of
evidence from his scriptures. It looks to us, given our way of looking at the world,
that Steve’s views on these matters provide a clear case of him treating his views as
unfalsiﬁable. After all, he refuses to change his views in spite of the overwhelming
evidence we provide.

63

64

Fundamental Issues

But now, look at the matter from Steve’s perspective. During our discussions
with Steve, he often presents us with what he takes to be convincing evidence that
the scriptures in question are accurate. And if his scriptures are correct, then
Steve’s beliefs are justiﬁed and our beliefs are the ones that are incorrect. But
notice that we do not accept his evidence, refusing to change our views in spite of
what Steve takes to be overwhelming evidence supporting those views. Notably,
from Steve’s perspective it is we who are treating our views as unfalsiﬁable.
Also worth noting is that, from Steve’s perspective, he is treating his theory as
falsiﬁable. Steve clearly agrees that he would be willing to give up his views if faced
with a sufﬁcient amount of evidence. But what Steve takes to be the relevant
evidence is very different from what I and most of my acquaintances take to be the
relevant evidence. I and most of my acquaintances put the most emphasis on what
we would consider empirically based evidence – evidence from physics, astron­
omy, cosmology, and the like. But for Steve, the most important evidence is
evidence from his scriptures. So, if he were given evidence based on his scriptures
(perhaps in the form of newly discovered scriptures, or a new and better
translation of existing scriptures, or the like), he readily agrees that he would
be willing to change his views. Hence, from his perspective, he is indeed willing to
give up his views if faced with a sufﬁcient amount of evidence, and so he is, from
his perspective, treating his theories as falsiﬁable.
The key and difﬁcult issue here is the question of what counts as the relevant
evidence. This is a subtle but important point, and one that comes up again and
again in the history and philosophy of science. Given its importance, it is worth
repeating: in almost all real-life cases, the main point of disagreement is not
whether one party or the other is willing to give up their theories if faced with
sufﬁcient evidence. Rather, the main point of disagreement is what counts as the
most relevant and most important evidence.
Importantly, what one takes to be the most relevant and important evidence
ties in closely with one’s overall worldview. Steve’s trust in his scriptures is a core
piece of his jigsaw puzzle. He could not give up his trust in his scriptures without
drastically altering, and really replacing, most of his overall jigsaw puzzle. And if I
am honest, my emphasis on what I take to be the appropriate sort of empirically
based evidence is likewise a core piece of my jigsaw puzzle. In other words, our
respective systems of beliefs heavily inﬂuence what we take to be the relevant
evidence, and this in turn heavily inﬂuences our views on who is treating his or her
theory as unfalsiﬁable.

Concluding Remarks
Before closing, I want to stress – strongly stress – a critical point. In the discussion
above, I am not suggesting that some sort of relativism is correct, nor am I
suggesting that all evidence and worldviews are equally reasonable. And I am
certainly not suggesting that Steve’s views are reasonable. I think Steve’s views are
entirely unreasonable. I think it is clear, given the past 400 years of extraordinary
advances largely due to empirically based sciences, that continuing to base
evidence on literal readings of religious scriptures is a bad and outdated idea.

7 Falsiﬁability

And I think cases such as Steve’s are the clearest cases of individuals who are
treating their views as unfalsiﬁable.
With the example of Steve, the main point I am trying to drive home is that
whether someone is treating a theory as unfalsiﬁable, and if so, why, is a much
more subtle and complex issue than is often appreciated. As the case of Steve
illustrates, we cannot merely claim that he refuses to accept our evidence, and
thereby conclude that he is treating his theory as unfalsiﬁable. Again, he can say
the exact same thing about us – that we refuse to accept his evidence. So if we are
to make a case that Steve is treating his theory as unfalsiﬁable, we have to do better
than this.
Likewise, it would not be reasonable to merely assert, dogmatically, that our
preferred evidence is the correct type of evidence. That is, we cannot claim that
Steve is treating his theory as unfalsiﬁable based on dogmatically asserting that
our evidence is the correct type of evidence.
To build a case that Steve is treating his theory as unfalsiﬁable, we would need
to consider a number of interrelated issues, including issues such as whether it is
more reasonable to appeal to empirical evidence rather than relying on ancient
scriptures. Such a case can be made, that is, I do not think there is much question
that when such factors are considered, the correct conclusion is that Steve is
indeed treating his theory as unfalsiﬁable. The main point, though, is that making
a convincing case that someone is treating a theory as unfalsiﬁable is complicated.
So as stated at the opening of this chapter, falsiﬁability turns out to be a much
more subtle and complicated issue than it at ﬁrst appears to be. Watch for these
issues as we explore, in subsequent chapters, some of the major developments
from the history of science.

65

66

8
Instrumentalism and Realism
The goal of this chapter is to introduce two common attitudes toward scientiﬁc
theories. These attitudes are generally labeled instrumentalism (or operational­
ism) and realism. As a backdrop to our discussion of instrumentalism and realism,
let’s ﬁrst take a look at two issues of central importance to scientiﬁc theories,
namely, prediction and explanation.

Prediction and Explanation
Suppose we ask the question “What do we want from scientiﬁc theories?” Certainly,
the ability to make accurate predictions is one feature we want. As discussed in
Chapter 4, when Einstein introduced his theory of relativity in the early 1900s, one
of the points in the theory’s favor was that it made accurate predictions, predictions
not made by any other theory, as to what would be observed during the solar eclipse
of 1919. Generally speaking, the ability to make accurate predictions is a feature we
require of acceptable scientiﬁc theories.
In addition, there is widespread agreement that the ability to explain the
relevant data is another feature we require of an acceptable theory. When a new
theory is introduced there is generally an existing body of observations, an
existing body of data, that is relevant to the theory. And in addition to making
accurate predictions about what we might observe in the future, we want a theory
to be able to explain the data we already have.
Although there is agreement that in some sense explanation is an important
feature of acceptable theories, there is much less agreement on what exactly
counts as an adequate explanation. Most notably, in explaining the data, is it
sufﬁcient that the theory merely specify that the data should be observed, or does
an adequate explanation also need to specify how or why the events in question
occurred? These and other questions about the nature of explanation are
difﬁcult and controversial. To help clarify these issues, philosophers of science
often distinguish between explanation (or what is sometimes referred to as
“formal explanation”), on the one hand, and what is often termed understanding,
on the other.

Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

8 Instrumentalism and Realism

In this context, “explanation” is used in a fairly minimalist way. More speciﬁ­
cally, one says that a theory explains a piece of existing data or observation if one
could have predicted the data from the theory. An example may help illustrate. In
the early 1900s it had been noted, for some decades, that there were certain
peculiarities about the orbit of Mercury. Einstein’s theory of relativity did not
come about until after these observations about Mercury had been made. But had
Einstein’s theory of relativity been developed before these observations, the theory
could have been used to predict that such peculiarities would be observed. In other
words, when Einstein’s theory was developed in the early 1900s, it could be used to
explain (again, in this minimalist sense of “explanation”) these peculiarities.
In contrast, and broadly speaking, “understanding” is used to refer to a
somewhat more thorough appreciation of the data and observations. For example,
consider the observation that falling bodies accelerate at about 10 meters per
second squared. One can use Newton’s theories and equations concerning gravity
to show that falling objects should accelerate at about this rate. That is, Newton’s
physics can be used to explain (in the minimalist sense of “explanation” described
above) this data. Now if you take gravity as a really existing force acting on objects
(that is, you take what is called a realist attitude, which we will explore more fully
in a moment, toward Newton’s concept of gravity), then you might say you know
not only that objects accelerate at about 10 meters per second squared, but you
also know why they do so – they do so because they are under the inﬂuence of a
gravitational force. In this case, we would say that you have both an explanation
for the data, and also an understanding of the data.
The notion of explanation (again, in the somewhat minimalist sense described
above) is a reasonably straightforward and uncontroversial notion. In contrast,
issues surrounding understanding are quite complex and controversial. For now,
to keep our discussion relatively straightforward, we will take the minimalist
approach to the concept of explanation. That is, unless otherwise speciﬁed, for
the remainder of this book we will say that a theory explains an existing piece of
data or observation if the theory could have been used to predict that data or
observation.
One ﬁnal brief note before closing this section: while explanation and
prediction are the most important characteristics we require of acceptable
theories, it is worth noting that other characteristics, such as simplicity,
elegance, and beauty, are often appealed to in arguing for and against theories.
In the examples from the history of science we will look at in upcoming
chapters, we will generally focus on how well competing theories predict and
explain the relevant data. But keep an eye out for these other factors as well – we
will see that they also sometimes play a role.

Instrumentalism and Realism
As noted, there is general agreement that accurate predictions and explanations
are required from scientiﬁc theories. But are these central characteristics enough?
Or is it the case, as Einstein came to believe (at least, the older Einstein – the
younger Einstein was not so committed to this view), that reality is the business of

67

68

Fundamental Issues

Figure 8.1 Mars’ motion on the Ptolemaic
system.

physics (and, of course, other sciences as well)? That is, is it important that a
theory reﬂect, or model, reality?
This issue – whether we should require theories to reﬂect the way things really
are – is a controversial issue. It is the issue that distinguishes instrumentalists, on
the one hand, and realists on the other. For an instrumentalist, an adequate theory
is one that predicts and explains, and whether that theory reﬂects or models
reality is not an important consideration. For a realist, on the other hand, an
adequate theory must not only predict and explain, but in addition it must reﬂect
the way things really are.
To illustrate the differences between instrumentalists and realists, it will help to
look at an actual theory. In this case, let us look at certain aspects of the Ptolemaic
astronomical system.
The Ptolemaic system was formulated by Claudius Ptolemy around 150 CE.
Ptolemy’s approach is an Earth-centered one, with the sun, planets, and stars
revolving around the Earth. Ptolemy considers each of the relevant objects – for
example, the moon, sun, and planets – in turn, specifying the mathematics needed
to predict and explain the observed positions of these objects.
One of the more interesting aspects of Ptolemy’s approach is his use of
epicycles. To understand the notion of epicycles, it might help to begin with
the picture presented in Figure 8.1. (It should be noted that this is an overly
simpliﬁed picture of Ptolemy’s approach, and we will not look at details of
Ptolemy’s approach until later chapters.) Roughly speaking, a planet such as Mars
moves in a circle around a point (labeled A on the diagram), while this point
moves in a circle around the Earth. The circle traced out by the movement of
Mars around A is called an epicycle. In short, an epicycle is a small circle on which
a planet moves, with the center of the epicycle itself moving around some other
point (usually, though not always, the center of the system).
Ptolemy’s theory, as with any, must predict and explain the relevant data. In this
case, the relevant data consists largely of the observed positions of the planets
(and other heavenly bodies) in the night sky. For example, consider the point of
light we call Mars. The observed position of this point of light varies from night to
night, week to week, year to year. In order to predict and explain this data,
Ptolemy’s theory (and any other Earth-centered approach) needs epicycles, or
something at least as complex. We will defer discussion of why an Earth-centered
system requires such complexities until later, but at this point, trust me: an Earthcentered model without epicycles (or something similar) cannot accurately
predict and explain the motion of the planets.

8 Instrumentalism and Realism

But with epicycles, the Ptolemaic system is quite good at explanation and
prediction. In fact, the Ptolemaic system is a marvelous mathematic model, able to
explain and predict the motion of all the visible planets, the moon, the sun, and
the stars with remarkable accuracy. It is not perfect with respect to prediction and
explanation (few theories are perfect), but it is very good, and certainly far
superior to any other approaches available at the time.
Thus, in terms of explanation and prediction, the Ptolemaic system, with its
peculiar-looking epicycles, is excellent. But are epicycles real? For most of the
time the Ptolemaic system was the primary astronomical theory, from about the
second century CE to the early 1600s, a typical attitude toward the “are epicycles
real” question was that it was not an important question. What was important was
that Ptolemy’s system, with epicycles, was excellent at prediction and explanation.
Whether Mars really moves on an epicycle is not important.
This sort of attitude – that the main task of the Ptolemaic theory is to explain
and predict the relevant data, and it simply is not important whether or not the
theory reﬂects the way things really are – is an example of an instrumentalist
attitude. This sort of attitude would not have been at all unusual in Ptolemy’s day,
nor is it at all unusual today. A large percentage of working scientists, and
philosophers of science, take the approach that the main task of a scientiﬁc theory
is to explain and predict the relevant data, and whether the theory pictures or
models reality is not important.
Realists, in contrast, while agreeing that a scientiﬁc theory ought to explain and
predict the relevant data, additionally require that a good scientiﬁc theory be real,
that is, that it reﬂect the way things really are. So for a realist, the question “Are
epicycles real?” is an important question. And for a realist, if Mars does not really
move on an epicycle, if epicycles are not real, then Ptolemy’s system would not be
an acceptable theory.
Incidentally, with respect to the question “Are epicycles real?” it is not obvious
how Ptolemy himself would have answered. In recent writings, Ptolemy is almost
always portrayed as an instrumentalist. But this is not entirely accurate. It is true
that Ptolemy generally is concerned with explanation and prediction, with little
discussion as to whether his system reﬂects the way things really are. When
Ptolemy speaks like this (which, again, is the majority of the time), he sounds like
an instrumentalist. On the other hand, there are passages where Ptolemy
discusses issues such as the mechanism by which planets are carried around
on their epicycles. Such discussions make sense only from a realist perspective,
and if Ptolemy had a purely instrumentalist attitude, it is difﬁcult to explain why
he includes such discussions. I think the most accurate view is that Ptolemy, like
many of us, held something of a mix of instrumentalist and realist attitudes.
Mixtures of these attitudes are not uncommon. It is certainly possible, and not
at all contradictory, to hold a realist attitude toward certain parts of a theory while
having an instrumentalist attitude toward other parts of the theory. For example,
before the 1600s it would not be unusual for someone to hold a realist attitude
toward the Earth-centered part of the Ptolemaic system, while holding an
instrumentalist attitude toward the part of the theory involving epicycles. Prior
to the 1600s it was widely, and quite reasonably, believed that the Earth really was
the center of the universe. Thus, people would generally view the Earth-centered

69

70

Fundamental Issues

part of Ptolemy’s theory as reﬂecting the way things really are. Many, perhaps
most, of those same people took an instrumentalist attitude toward the epicycles
in the Ptolemaic system.
It is also common for someone to have a realist attitude toward theories in one
branch of science while holding an instrumentalist attitude toward theories in
other branches of science. For example, virtually everyone I know holds a realist
attitude toward the current sun-centered model of our solar system. Many of
those same people, though, take an instrumentalist attitude toward much of
modern quantum theory.
It is also possible to “accept” two competing theories by having an instrumen­
talist attitude toward one and a realist attitude toward the other. For example, the
Copernican system (a sun-centered view) was published in the 1550s, and in
the late 1500s it was not unusual for a European university to teach both the
Ptolemaic system and the Copernican system. Before the invention of the
telescope (about 1600), there was good reason to think the Earth was indeed
the center of the universe. Thus, as noted, people typically took a realist attitude
toward the Earth-centered part of the Ptolemaic system. On the other hand, in
certain ways the Copernican system was somewhat easier to use, and so an
instrumentalist attitude was taken toward this system. That is, the Copernican
system was not viewed as reﬂecting the way things really are, but it was accepted
and widely used as a convenient theory for making predictions and explanations.
In short, between about 1550 and 1600, the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems
coexisted peacefully. A realist attitude was typically taken toward the former and
an instrumentalist attitude toward the latter. This relatively peaceful coexistence
changed dramatically with the invention of the telescope and the discovery of
evidence indicating that the Earth-centered view was wrong. But that is a story for
later chapters.
In summary, instrumentalism and realism are attitudes toward theories. Both
instrumentalists and realists agree that an adequate theory must accurately
predict and explain the relevant data. But realists require, in addition, that an
adequate theory pictures, or models, the way things really are. Finally, it is neither
contradictory nor unusual to ﬁnd mixtures of instrumentalist and realist atti­
tudes, or for an individual to hold realist attitudes toward certain theories and
instrumentalist attitudes toward others.

Concluding Remarks
I will close with two quick notes. As is the case with the concept of falsiﬁability
discussed in the previous chapter, authors often speak of instrumentalism and
realism as if they were features of scientiﬁc theories. But instrumentalism and
realism are better thought of as attitudes toward scientiﬁc theories, rather than
being aspects of the theories themselves. That is, just as typical theories are not
inherently falsiﬁable or unfalsiﬁable, so also typical theories are not inherently
instrumentalist or realist. Rather, one’s attitude toward a theory is what is better
classiﬁed as instrumentalist or realist.

8 Instrumentalism and Realism

Lastly, in Chapter 2 we discussed correspondence and coherence theories of
truth. Recall that advocates of correspondence theories see truth as a matter of a
belief corresponding with reality, whereas advocates of coherence theories view
truth as a matter of a belief cohering, or ﬁtting in with, some overall set of beliefs.
One might wonder whether correspondence and coherence theories go hand in
hand with realism and instrumentalism.
There is no necessary connection between theories of truth, on the one hand,
and instrumentalism and realism, on the other. However, it should come as no
surprise that there is some linkage between instrumentalist/realist attitudes and
coherence/correspondence theories of truth. Recall from Chapter 2 that advo­
cates of coherence theories of truth are often motivated by qualms about reality,
or more precisely, about our knowledge of reality. It would be rather odd (though
strictly speaking not contradictory) for someone having qualms about reality
when considering theories of truth to then insist, in the context of instrumental­
ism and realism, that theories model or reﬂect the way things really are. And so it
is not surprising that advocates of coherence theories of truth are more likely to
hold instrumentalist attitudes.
Likewise, it is not surprising that advocates of correspondence theories are
more likely to hold realist attitudes toward theories. The reasons are essentially
the same – if one sees truth as a matter of corresponding to the way things really
are, it would be natural to insist that scientiﬁc theories likewise model or reﬂect
the way things really are.
This, then, ends our survey of some of the preliminary and basic issues involved
in the history and philosophy of science. With an understanding of these issues,
we are in a better position to explore the issues raised in the next part of the book,
in which we investigate the transition from the Aristotelian to the Newtonian
worldview.

71

73

Part II
The Transition from the Aristotelian Worldview to the
Newtonian Worldview
In Part II, we explore the transition from the Aristotelian worldview to the
Newtonian worldview. This transition was largely initiated by new discoveries in
the early 1600s. In this transition, the issues explored in Part I – worldviews,
empirical and philosophical/conceptual facts, conﬁrming and disconﬁrming
evidence, auxiliary hypotheses, falsiﬁability, instrumentalism, realism – are
intertwined in interesting and complex ways. Discussion of this transition, and
the issues involved, sets the stage for our exploration, in Part III, of challenges to
our own worldview brought on by recent discoveries.

Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

75

9
The Structure of the Universe on the Aristotelian
Worldview
In this part of the book, we will be exploring the transition from the Aristotelian
worldview to the Newtonian worldview. The main goal of the current chapter is to
provide a general sense of how people typically viewed the universe from around
300 BCE to 1600 CE. This includes both views on the physical structure of the
universe and more conceptual beliefs as to what sort of universe we inhabit. We
will begin with a sketch of the physical structure of the universe.

The Physical Structure of the Universe
As previously indicated, the Aristotelian worldview was the dominant worldview
in the western world from about 300 BCE to about 1600 CE. When I say this was the
dominant worldview, I mean that a system of beliefs, with strong roots in the
views of Aristotle (though not necessarily identical to his views), was the main set
of beliefs in the western world. This worldview was certainly not the only system
of beliefs during that period – as with any period, there were a variety of
alternative and competing systems of beliefs – but the Aristotelian system of
beliefs was the most common.
On the Aristotelian worldview, the Earth was believed to be the center of the
universe. Contrary to what I think is often assumed, people did not believe in an
Earth-centered view merely for egotistical reasons. That is, the Earth-centered
view was not based, at least not originally, on the view that humans were special,
and thus should be at the center of all there is. True enough, the view that humans
are special ﬁts in well with the Earth-centered view, but the original reasons for
the view were a result of solid, empirically based reasoning. We will look at some
of those reasons in the next chapter.
Also contrary to what is often assumed, during the Aristotelian worldview the
Earth was viewed as spherical, not ﬂat. It was clear to our predecessors, since even
before the time of Aristotle, that the Earth was almost certainly spherical. Again,
we will look at the reasons for this belief in the next chapter, but they largely
overlap the reasons we have today.
With respect to the moon, sun, stars, and planets, the view was as follows. The
moon, of course, is the closest heavenly body to the Earth. The region between the
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

76

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

moon and the Earth – that is, the sublunar region – was thought to be importantly
different from the region from the moon outward – that is, the superlunar region.
We will discuss some of these differences in a moment.
Beyond the moon, the usual consensus was that the order of the planets and sun
was as follows: ﬁrst Mercury, then Venus, the sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and then
the so-called sphere of the ﬁxed stars. A few comments on the planets and stars
are in order.
Consider, for example, the planet Mars. In our time, when we think of Mars,
we picture a rocky body, something like the Earth, perhaps with a barren
landscape with more reddish soil than is found on Earth. But overall, we tend to
think of Mars as basically being like the Earth – a big rocky body moving
through space.
Our view of Mars is colored largely by the technology available. We have seen
photographs of the surface of Mars, seen data from spacecraft and rovers that
have visited Mars, perhaps observed Mars personally through a telescope, and so
on. In short, our view of Mars is heavily inﬂuenced by technology.
This technology was not available during the period of the Aristotelian
worldview. Beliefs about the stars and planets had to be based primarily on
naked-eye observations. What can one observe about stars and planets with the
naked eye? Not much. In fact, without modern technology, stars and planets
appear quite similar. Basically, stars and planets both appear to be points of light
in the night sky. The main observational difference between stars, on the one
hand, and the ﬁve points of light we call the planets (at least, the ﬁve planets visible
with the naked eye), on the other hand, is that stars and planets move across the
night sky in different ways. This different movement between planets and stars is
the main factor distinguishing planets from stars.
As such, there was no reason – none whatsoever – for people in the
Aristotelian worldview to think of planets as being at all like the Earth. In
fact, during the Aristotelian worldview the sun, stars, and planets were thought to
be composed of a similar substance, quite unlike anything found on Earth. This
substance, ether, was thought to be found only in the superlunar region, and was
thought to have unusual properties that explained why objects in the heavens
behaved as they did.
At the periphery of the universe was the sphere of the ﬁxed stars. The thinking
was that all the stars were the same distance from the Earth, embedded in a
sphere. The sphere turned on its axis, completing a revolution about once every
24 hours. As the sphere turned, it carried the stars with it, and this explained the
observational fact that the stars appear to rotate in a circle around the Earth every
24 hours.
Finally, a note on the size of the universe. How big did they consider the
universe to be, that is, how far away was the sphere of the ﬁxed stars? We have to
be careful here. By the standards of the time, the universe was considered to be
quite large. But we consider the universe to be unimaginably larger than they did,
and perhaps inﬁnite, so by modern standards their view of the universe strikes us
as a concept of a relatively small universe. To put the same point another way,
they considered the universe to be large, but they had no idea how huge it would
turn out to be.

9 The Universe on the Aristotelian Worldview

Conceptual Beliefs about the Universe
When we turn from beliefs about the physical structure of the universe, and
consider instead more conceptual beliefs about the universe, the two most
important such beliefs concern teleology and essentialism. That is, the universe
was considered to be teleological and essentialistic. Importantly, the teleology and
essentialism were closely intertwined, to the extent that they can be viewed as ﬂip
sides of the same coin. A few words of explanation about these concepts are in
order.
To understand teleology, let’s begin by understanding the notion of a teleologi­
cal explanation. Suppose we ask the question “Why do fruit-bearing plants bear
fruit: for example, why do apple trees have apples?” Clearly, the answer has to do
with reproduction, that is, apples contain seeds, and seeds are the means by which
apple trees reproduce, so clearly apples have something to do with reproduction.
But note that most plants do not encase their seeds in fruit, so why do fruitbearing plants do so? Incidentally, contrary to what is often thought, the fruit does
not provide any source of nutrients to the seeds. So the question is a good one –
apple trees, for example, expend a lot of their resources to develop apples, and
encase their seeds in these apples, yet the apples are of no direct use in providing
nutrients to the seeds. So why in the world do apple trees go to so much trouble
and expense to encase their seeds in apples?
One good answer is that the apples provide a means of dispersing the seeds.
Speaking anthropomorphically for a moment, look at the situation from the point
of view of the apple tree. Remember, plants do not move. So if you drop your seeds
straight down, they will land on a piece of ground that is already taken, so to speak.
You need some way to get the seeds away from yourself. Most plants have this
problem, and the problem is solved in different ways. Some plants encase their
seeds in light, ﬂuffy structures that are caught and carried off by the wind, some
encase their seeds in burry containers that stick to and are carried off by the fur of
passing animals, some encase their seeds in helicopter-like structures that spin
away from the plant, and so on. Fruit-bearing plants encase their seeds in
structures that are a good food source for animals, and when the animals eat
the fruit they also eat the seeds. A day or two later the animal excretes the seeds, at
this time some distance from the parent plant (along with a convenient supply of
fertilizer too, it might be noted).
In short, if we ask the question “Why do apple trees have apples?” a good
answer is that they have apples in order to disperse seeds. This explanation is a
prime example of a teleological explanation. Here are some other examples. Why
does the heart beat? To pump blood. Why are you reading this book? To learn
about the history and philosophy of science. Why did the stegosaur have large
bony plates on its back? To regulate heat.
In general, a teleological explanation is any explanation that is given in terms of
a goal, or purpose, or function to be fulﬁlled. In all the cases above, the goal,
purpose, or function should be clear: dispersing seeds, pumping blood, learning,
and regulating heat are all goals, or purposes, or functions.
Now let’s contrast the explanations above with mechanistic explanations. A
mechanistic explanation is an explanation that is not given in terms of goals, or

77

78

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

purposes, or functions. For example, suppose I drop a rock. If we ask the question
“Why did the rock fall?” since the late 1600s the standard explanation has been
that the rock fell because of gravity. Note that in this explanation there is no hint –
none at all – of any goal, or purpose, or function. The rock has no goal or purpose
in falling, nor is any function involved. It is simply an object under the inﬂuence of
an external force. Such goalless, purposeless, functionless explanations are
mechanistic explanations. So in general, a teleological explanation is one given
in terms of goals, or purposes, or functions, while a mechanistic explanation is one
that does not use goals, purposes, or functions.
Note that many questions admit of both teleological and mechanistic explan­
ations. The example above, that apple trees have apples to disperse seeds, was a
teleological explanation. But the same question can be given a perfectly good
mechanistic explanation, as follows. In the evolutionary history of apple trees,
those ancestors of modern apple trees that produced apples (or the predecessors
of apples) survived and reproduced more successfully than those that did not, and
hence apple-bearing apple trees (or again, their predecessors) came to be
represented more highly in the population. In short, the answer to why apple
trees have apples is simply a matter of an evolutionary account involving different
rates of survival and reproduction.
Notice that this evolutionary account does not make use of any goals, purposes,
or functions. And again, this is a perfectly accurate explanation of why apple trees
have apples. In general, questions often admit of both teleological and mecha­
nistic explanations.
I have been going on at some length about teleological explanations because
such explanations illustrate an important difference between the way we con­
ceptualize the universe, and the way our predecessors conceptualized the
universe. Within the Aristotelian worldview, teleological explanations were
considered the proper sort of scientiﬁc explanation. This is in stark contrast
to modern science, in which mechanistic explanations dominate. The reason
teleological explanations were considered the proper sort of scientiﬁc explanation
is straightforward: within the Aristotelian worldview, the universe was considered
really to be teleological. That is, the teleology was not merely a feature of the
explanation; rather, the teleology was considered to be a feature of the universe.
Some examples might help to illustrate this. Suppose we return to the example
of the dropped rock. Again, in the modern era the explanation for why the rock
drops is given in terms of gravity. But the notion of gravity (in our modern sense of
the term) did not come about until the 1600s, so whatever the explanation is for
the falling rock within the Aristotelian worldview, the explanation cannot be
given in terms of our notion of gravity. (Incidentally, the term “gravity” does
appear often in writings before the 1600s, but it does not refer to anything like our
usual sense of the term, that is, as an attractive force. Rather, before the 1600s
“gravity” generally simply referred to the tendency of heavy objects to move
downward.) Within the Aristotelian worldview, the rock falls downward because
it is composed primarily of the heavy earth element, and as mentioned in Chapter
1, the earth element has a natural tendency to move toward the center of the
universe. To say the same thing in slightly different terms, the earth element has a

9 The Universe on the Aristotelian Worldview

natural tendency to fulﬁll a certain goal, namely, of being at the center of the
universe.
Each of the basic elements has a natural goal of reaching its natural place in the
universe, and these natural goals explain why objects move naturally as they do.
Fire burns upward, because the ﬁre element has a natural goal to move toward the
periphery, away from the center. And so on for other cases of natural movement.
(Enforced movement, for example when I throw a rock upward, is a different
story, but not of direct importance here.)
Similar accounts hold for the superlunar region. The element ether has a
natural goal to move in a perfectly circular manner, and this explains the circular
movement of heavenly bodies such as the sun, stars, and planets. In general, the
universe was viewed as a teleological universe, full of natural goals and purposes.
Going hand in hand with this teleology was the other key concept mentioned
above, that of essentialism. Natural objects were viewed as having essential
natures, and these essential natures were why objects behave as they do. All
objects are composed of matter organized in a certain way, and given the matter
out of which an object is composed, and the way that matter is organized, the
object will have certain natural abilities and natural tendencies, which we can
summarize by saying the objects have an essential nature. The simplest objects –
the basic elements – of course have the simplest essential natures. Their essential
natures consist simply of their tendency to move toward their natural place.
Importantly, notice how closely the teleology and essentialism are tied together.
An object’s essential nature is a teleological nature, and again, the teleology and
essentialism are like two sides of the same coin.
More complex objects have more complex essential natures, but the general
story is still the same. For example, consider an acorn. An acorn, as with all
objects, is composed of certain types of matter arranged in a certain way, and as
noted above, because of the matter of which it is composed, and the organization
of that matter, the acorn will have certain natural abilities and tendencies. In
particular, an acorn has a natural goal of becoming a mature oak, and under the
appropriate conditions the acorn will grow into an oak, eventually reproducing by
producing further acorns. Again, all this is because of the essential nature of the
acorn, which arises out of its matter and the organization of that matter.
Notice again the close tie between the essential nature of the acorn, and its goaloriented, teleological behavior. The acorn’s essential nature is closely tied to its
growth, maturation, and eventual reproduction. In other words, the acorn’s
essential nature is a teleological one – to grow and reproduce.
Within the Aristotelian worldview, the job of a natural scientist is largely the
job of coming to understand the teleological, essential natures of categories
of objects. A biologist, for example, will want to understand the essential
natures of species of animals. This will usually not be an easy or trivial task, but
the outline of the task is clear. One needs to understand the matter out of which
an object is composed, the organization of that matter, how that matter came to
be organized in this way, and what sorts of natural goals or functions the object
is geared toward. In doing so, one will come to understand the teleological,
essential nature of the object.

79

80

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

To sum up the main points of this section: all natural objects have essential
natures; the essential natures are teleological; and the essential natures are why
objects behave as they do. In short, the universe was viewed as a teleological,
essentialistic universe.

Concluding Remarks
In summary, with respect to the physical structure of the universe, the universe
was conceived of as having the Earth at its center, with the moon, sun, stars, and
planets revolving about it. As we will see in the next chapter, these were the beliefs
that were best supported by the available evidence of the time.
In more conceptual terms, the Aristotelian worldview viewed the universe as a
teleological and essentialistic place. The universe was chock-full of natural goals
and purposes, and understanding such goals and purposes was one of the key
tasks of a natural scientist in trying to understand the universe.
In the western world, this general view of the universe was the standard view for
a long period of time – almost 2,000 years. It goes without saying that over this
long course of time, various additions and modiﬁcations were made to this view of
the world. For example, the main religions of the western world – Judaism,
Christianity, and Islam – each made contributions. But the contributions were
still within the general Aristotelian framework – that is, within the framework of
an Earth-centered, essentialistic, teleological universe.

81

10
The Preface to Ptolemy’s Almagest: The Earth as Spherical,
Stationary, and at the Center of the Universe
In the previous chapter, we looked at beliefs about the general structure of the
universe in the Aristotelian worldview. In this chapter, we explore some of the
reasons behind those beliefs; in particular, we look at the arguments supporting
the belief that the Earth was spherical, stationary, and at the center of the universe.
One of the main goals of this chapter is to illustrate that beliefs of the
Aristotelian worldview, although very different from ours, were nonetheless
well-supported beliefs. There is an unfortunate tendency to view the beliefs of
our predecessors as being in some way childish or naive, but in this chapter we will
see that this is not at all the case. As you consider the arguments presented in this
chapter, note that, in general, they are quite good arguments. Most (aside from
those about the Earth being spherical) turned out to be mistaken, but mistaken in
subtle ways and for reasons that are far from obvious. In fact, discovering the roots
of the ﬂaws in the arguments took the combined efforts of some of the bestknown names in the history of science (including Galileo, Descartes, and Newton,
to name just a few).
Most of the arguments we will consider can be found in Aristotle’s On the
Heavens and the opening section of Ptolemy’s Almagest. Most of the arguments in
these two works are similar. Ptolemy’s writing, however, is generally somewhat
easier to follow, and so in this chapter I focus mainly on the arguments as they are
presented in his work.
As a ﬁnal introductory note, it is worth mentioning that we focus here on just a
small set of arguments from the Aristotelian worldview – those presented by
Ptolemy supporting the belief that the Earth was spherical, stationary, and at the
center of the universe. But the same moral holds for most of the other beliefs of
the Aristotelian worldview: although they are different beliefs than ours, and most
turned out to be wrong, the people holding those beliefs generally had good
reasons for doing so. We will begin with some preliminary comments on
Ptolemy’s Almagest.
The Almagest was published around 150 CE. It is a highly technical work and,
with text and illustrations, modern printings of this work run to about 700 pages.
It is a substantial and difﬁcult work.
The arguments we will consider come from the preface to the Almagest. This is
by far the least technical section of the book (in fact, it is not at all technical). In
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

82

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

this preface, Ptolemy presents a number of arguments concerning the general
structure and workings of the universe. In this chapter we focus only on the
arguments supporting the beliefs about the structure of the universe, although in
later chapters we will consider some of Ptolemy’s arguments concerning the way
the universe works (for example, arguments supporting the belief about what
keeps the sun, stars, and planets moving). We begin with the arguments
supporting the view that the Earth is spherical.

The Earth as Spherical
There is a common but mistaken belief that, before the 1500s, people tended to
believe the Earth was ﬂat. In fact, very few educated people, at least since the time
of the ancient Greeks (such as Plato and Aristotle around 400 BCE), have believed
the Earth to be ﬂat. It is an interesting question how this misperception about our
predecessors came to be so widespread, but one that goes too far aﬁeld of our
focus. Sufﬁce it to say that our predecessors, going back at least to 400 BCE, had
good reasons for believing the Earth to be spherical. Consider, for example, the
following passage from the preface to Ptolemy’s Almagest. (Hereafter, all quota­
tions, unless otherwise noted, are from Ptolemy’s preface. Numbers in brackets,
for example [1], are my additions for use when referring to particular passages.)
Section 4. That the Earth, Taken as a Whole, Is Sensibly Spherical
Now, that also the Earth taken as a whole is sensibly spherical, we could
most likely think out in this way. [1] For again it is possible to see that the
sun and moon and the other stars do not rise and set at the same time for
every observer on the Earth, but always earlier for those living towards the
orient [towards the east] and later for those living towards the occident
[towards the west]. [2] For we ﬁnd that the phenomena of eclipses taking
place at the same time, especially those of the moon, are not recorded at the
same hours for everyone – that is, relatively to equal intervals of time from
noon; but we always ﬁnd later hours recorded for observers towards the
orient than for those towards the occident. [3] And since the differences in
the hours is found to be proportional to the distances between the places,
one would reasonably suppose the surface of the Earth spherical, with the
result that the general uniformity of curvature would assure every part’s
covering those following it proportionately. But this would not happen if the
ﬁgure were any other, as can be seen from the following considerations.
[4] For, if it [the Earth] were concave, the rising stars would appear ﬁrst to
people towards the occident; and if it were ﬂat, the stars would rise and set
for all people together and at the same time; and if it were a pyramid, a cube,
or any other polygonal ﬁgure, they would again appear at the same time for
all observers on the same straight line. But none of these things appears to
happen. [5] It is further clear that it could not be cylindrical . . . [since] the
more we advance towards the north pole, the more the southern stars are
hidden and the northern stars appear. So it is clear that here the curvature of
the Earth covering parts uniformly in oblique directions proves its spherical

10 The Preface to Ptolemy’s Almagest

form on every side. [6] Again, whenever we sail towards mountains or any
high places from whatever angle and in whatever direction, we see their bulk
little by little increasing as if they were arising from the sea, whereas before
they seemed submerged because of the curvature of the water’s surface.
(Munitz 1957, pp. 108–9)
Ptolemy ﬁrst notes, in the passage I have referenced as [1], that the sun, moon,
and stars rise and set at different times, depending on where one is located on the
Earth. For example, consider the rising sun this morning. I am sure you are aware
that when the sun rose in your location this morning it had already risen for those
living any substantial distance east of you, and had not yet risen for those living
west of you. Ptolemy and his contemporaries were also aware of this fact, and it is
most straightforwardly explained if the Earth is spherical. In passage [2], Ptolemy
notes that the times that eclipses are recorded to have occurred are likewise best
explained by a spherical Earth, and in [3], he notes that since the difference in
times is proportional to the distance between observers, the curvature of the Earth
must be pretty much uniform.
Note that Ptolemy’s implicit reasoning here is just the common type of
conﬁrmation reasoning we discussed in Chapter 4. That is, Ptolemy’s implicit
reasoning in [1] is that, if the Earth is spherical, one should observe the sun, moon,
and stars rising earlier for those living in the east and later for those living in the
west, and since this is what is observed, this supports the view that the Earth is
spherical. Similar considerations hold for [2] and [3], that is, these also support,
via straightforward conﬁrmation reasoning, the conclusion that the Earth is
uniformly spherical.
Ptolemy next, in [4], turns to a pattern of disconﬁrmation reasoning, arguing
that if the Earth were some shape other than spherical, then we would not observe
what we in fact do observe. For example, Ptolemy notes that if the Earth were ﬂat,
we should observe the sun, moon, and stars rising at the same time everywhere on
the Earth, but since we do not observe this, we have disconﬁrming evidence that
the Earth is ﬂat.
Notice that, thus far, Ptolemy’s arguments really only show that the Earth is
uniformly curved in the east–west direction. In other words, Ptolemy’s observa­
tions thus far are consistent with a cylindrically shaped Earth with a north–south
orientation. So to ﬁnish this section, Ptolemy considers evidence showing that the
Earth cannot be shaped like a cylinder. In [5], Ptolemy notes that different stars
are visible as one moves north and south. For example, those of us in the northern
hemisphere can see the star we call Polaris (that is, the North Star), whereas those
in the southern hemisphere cannot see this star. Likewise, those in the southern
hemisphere can see the constellation we call the Southern Cross; those in the
northern hemisphere cannot. This is exactly what one would expect if the Earth
were spherical, and contrary to what one would expect if the Earth were any other
shape, such as cylindrical. Finally, in [6], Ptolemy notes the long-known fact that
as one sails toward land, the ﬁrst parts of the land that are visible are the tops of
mountains, and then the lower areas gradually become visible as one sails closer to
the land. And again, this is disconﬁrming evidence for a ﬂat Earth, but exactly
what one would expect if the Earth were spherical.

83

84

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

In summary, it was well established that the Earth was most likely spherically
shaped. We will next consider the arguments (which, although solid arguments,
turned out to be mistaken) that the Earth is stationary.

The Earth as Stationary
Prior to the 1600s, there were excellent reasons for believing the Earth was
stationary, that is, for believing the Earth did not move in an orbit about another
body (such as the sun), or by revolving on its axis. Although these arguments
turned out to be mistaken, they were mistaken for subtle reasons.
As far back as the ancient Greeks, people had considered the possibility that the
Earth moves, either around the sun or on its own axis (or both). Ptolemy also
explicitly considers this possibility. For example, in Section 7 of the preface,
Ptolemy writes:
Now some people . . . agree on something, as they think, more plausible.
And it seems to them there is nothing against their supposing, for instance,
the heavens immobile and the Earth as turning on the same axis from west
to east very nearly one revolution a day . . . (Munitz 1957, p. 112)
Ptolemy was well aware that the apparent daily movement of, say, the sun
around the Earth, could be explained either by supposing the Earth is stationary,
and the sun revolves once a day around the Earth, or by supposing the sun is
stationary and the Earth revolves once a day on its axis. Both suppositions would
explain the apparent daily motion of the sun around the Earth, and in the
Almagest we see Ptolemy explicitly considering the latter possibility.
But Ptolemy concludes that the view that the Earth is moving, either on its axis
or about the sun, is contrary to some solid evidence and thus the view that the
Earth is stationary is the better-supported view. Ptolemy provides a number of
what I will call common-sense arguments, as well as two somewhat difﬁcult but
quite powerful arguments. These latter arguments I will call the argument from
objects in motion and the argument from stellar parallax. We will begin with the
common-sense arguments.
Common-sense arguments
Notice that a stationary Earth is the view that we (and our predecessors as well)
arrive at by common sense. For example, if you look out your window, it certainly
appears that the Earth is stationary. After all, when I am in motion – say, in a car,
on a train, or on my bike – I can certainly notice that I am moving. Even at
relatively slow speeds, for example when bicycling, I feel the vibration caused by
movement, I feel the wind against my face, and so on. Or if you are in a convertible
moving at 70 miles per hour down the interstate, there is no question in your
mind that you are in motion. Again, you feel the vibration, the wind, and in
general, there are observable consequences of being in motion.

10 The Preface to Ptolemy’s Almagest

Now suppose the Earth is in motion. First, consider the possibility that the
Earth revolves once a day on its axis. The Earth is about 25,000 miles in
circumference (the people of Ptolemy’s time, and for that matter those going
back as far as the ancient Greeks, also had a pretty good idea that the Earth was
about this size). Given this circumference, if the Earth revolves once a day on its
axis, then the surface of the Earth at the equator is traveling at over 1,000 miles per
hour (this is the speed the surface would have to be traveling in order to go 25,000
miles in 24 hours). In short, if the Earth is revolving once a day on its axis, then you
and I, on the surface of the Earth, would currently be moving at about 1,000 miles
per hour. But again, when we move at relatively slow speeds, on bicycles or even in
convertibles on the interstate, we clearly notice the effects of the motion. So
surely, if we were currently moving at 1,000 miles per hour, we would notice the
effects. Since we (and likewise, those in Ptolemy’s time) do not observe such
effects, this provides disconﬁrming evidence that the Earth revolves on its axis.
The situation is more dramatic if we consider the possibility that the Earth
moves about the sun, completing an orbit once a year. We know the radius of the
Earth’s orbit is almost 100,000,000 miles (incidentally, in Ptolemy’s time people
did not have any good idea of the distance between the Earth and sun, but
nonetheless, it would have been clear that the distance would have been
substantial). Given the distance between the Earth and the sun, the Earth would
have to be moving at about 70,000 miles per hour to complete a yearly orbit
around the sun. But again, we notice dramatic effects when driving in a
convertible at 70 miles per hour. We feel 70-mile-per-hour winds in our face,
we feel the vibration caused by the movement, we would tumble off if we tried to
stand up in the convertible, and so on. So surely, if we were moving at 70,000 miles
per hour, we would notice some sort of effect of that motion. But where are the
70,000-mile-per-hour winds? Where is the vibration such dramatic motion would
certainly cause? How could we possibly stand on an Earth that is moving at 70,000
miles per hour?
In short, these are some obvious effects we would expect to observe if the Earth
were in motion, and given that we do not observe such effects, we have good
reason to believe the Earth is not in motion.
Consider one more common-sense argument, again one which Ptolemy
suggests. In my front yard is a reasonably large boulder, about 4 feet high and
3 feet wide. That boulder just sits there, unmoving. And it is not going to move
unless something moves it. Furthermore, if I were to move it, say, with a garden
tractor, the boulder would only continue to move so long as I continued to push
on it – as soon as I stopped pushing on it, it would halt.
Now consider the Earth. The Earth seems to be basically a large rock, vastly
huger and heavier than the boulder in my front yard. So, just as the boulder will
not move unless something moves it, likewise the Earth will not move unless
something moves it. And just as the boulder will only continue to move so long as
something continues to move it, likewise the Earth would only continue to move if
there were something continually moving it. But there is seemingly nothing
substantial enough to ever move the Earth in the ﬁrst place, and even if there were,
there is nothing that could keep the Earth continually moving. So it is far more
reasonable to believe the Earth is not moving.

85

86

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

In summary, even these basic, common-sense arguments provide good reasons
to believe the Earth is stationary. Again, these arguments are ﬂawed, since we now
know the Earth is in motion, both on its axis and about the sun. But the ﬂaws in
even these common-sense arguments are not obvious, and it took a lot of talent,
not to mention decades and even centuries of work, for our predecessors to ﬁgure
out how we can be moving at the speeds noted above, yet not observe any of the
expected effects. This will be part of the story of later chapters.
The argument from objects in motion
The argument from objects in motion is one of the most powerful arguments
supporting a stationary Earth. Again it is based on simple observations. Ptolemy
notes that dropped objects fall perpendicular to the surface of the Earth. In what
follows, I will modify Ptolemy’s argument somewhat, considering instead objects
that are thrown straight up in the air, noting that such objects go straight up,
perpendicular to the surface of the Earth, and then fall straight down, again
perpendicular to the Earth. The idea behind my example and Ptolemy’s example is
exactly the same, although I believe the point is somewhat easier to see when
considering the case of objects thrown in the air. As we will see, the fact that a
dropped object falls perpendicular to the Earth, or that a thrown object goes
straight up and then straight down, suggests that the Earth must be stationary.
To understand the argument, we must discuss common views of the behavior
of moving objects, such as objects moving because they have been thrown straight
up. I want you to consider two options involving thrown objects, and ask yourself
which you think is closer to what would actually happen.
In both options, we will imagine that Sara is holding a ball and is moving, left to
right, on a skateboard. As she travels along, she throws the ball straight up in the
air. All the while she continues to move. The key question is this: while the ball is
in the air, will Sara (moving along on the skateboard) move out from under the
ball, so that the ball lands behind her? Or will instead the ball travel in an arc,
landing back in (or at least close to) her hand?
Pictorially, the two options are represented in Figures 10.1 and 10.2. Now, the
question is whether the ball will travel as depicted in Figure 10.1, such that, while
the ball is in the air, Sara moves out from under it and thus it lands behind Sara, or
whether the ball will travel in an arc, landing approximately back in her hand, as in
Figure 10.2. Again, ask yourself which of these options is the way you believe the
thrown ball will behave. Generally speaking, the question is whether when we are
in motion and throw an object straight up, the object will land behind us, or travel
in an arc and land back in or close to our hand.
When asked this question, the majority of people chose the option depicted in
Figure 10.1, and indeed, this does seem to be the common-sense view of motion.
But importantly, if you believe that is the correct view of motion, then to be
logically consistent you must also believe the Earth is stationary.
Here is why. In the scenario above, the source of motion is not relevant. That is,
nothing will change if Sara’s motion is due to her standing on roller skates,
standing on a moving car, standing on the pedals of a bicycle, or whatever. And
nothing will change if Sara’s motion is due to her standing on the surface of a

10 The Preface to Ptolemy’s Almagest

Figure 10.1 Does the ball follow this path?

Figure 10.2 Or does the ball follow this path?

moving Earth. That is, if Sara is moving because she is standing on the surface of a
moving Earth, and if thrown objects behave as pictured in Figure 10.1, then when
Sara is standing in her front yard and throws a ball straight up, she will move out
from underneath it (because of her motion due to her standing on the surface of a
moving Earth), and so the ball will fall behind her. But when we throw an object
straight up (or, as in Ptolemy’s example, we drop an object so that it falls straight
down), the object does not land behind us. And this is strong evidence that the
Earth is not in motion.
This is again a case of disconﬁrmation reasoning. If the Earth is in motion, then
objects thrown straight up will land behind us; but we do not observe thrown
objects landing behind us; so the Earth is not in motion.
As noted in Chapter 4, auxiliary hypotheses are almost always present in cases
of disconﬁrmation reasoning. In this case, the key auxiliary hypothesis involves
the view of motion. In particular, the argument, when this key auxiliary hypothesis
is included, should be this: if the Earth is in motion, and if the view of motion
depicted in Figure 10.1 is correct, then thrown objects will land behind us; but
thrown objects do not land behind us; so either the Earth is not in motion, or the
view of motion depicted in Figure 10.1 is not correct.

87

88

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

As it turns out, the Earth is indeed in motion, and the view of motion depicted
in Figure 10.1 is incorrect. But again, that view of motion is, even today, a common
(though mistaken) view of motion, and it was the accepted view of motion during
most of the time the Aristotelian worldview was dominant. Working out the
correct view of motion is one of the tasks that took an enormous amount of talent,
work, and time, and will be a topic of later chapters. At this point, though, it is
worth emphasizing again that, even though this argument of Ptolemy’s turns out
to be mistaken, the mistake is based on subtle and (even today) difﬁcult issues
involving motion.
The argument from stellar parallax
In Section 6 of the preface, Ptolemy notes that the “angular distances of the stars
appear everywhere equal and alike” (Munitz 1957, p. 110), and then in the next
section he notes that this fact about the stars supports the view that the Earth is
stationary. This argument is again one of the more compelling arguments for a
stationary Earth, but will take some work to understand.
When Ptolemy notes that the “angular distances” of the stars appear the same
everywhere, he is referring to what we would call stellar parallax. In particular,
Ptolemy is noting that we cannot observe stellar parallax, and this supports the
view that the Earth is stationary. To understand Ptolemy’s argument, let’s start by
understanding parallax.
Parallax is the apparent shift in the position of objects due to your (not their)
motion. For example, hold a pen vertically at arm’s length in front of your eyes.
Keeping the pen still, move your head to the left and right, and notice the shift in
the apparent positions of the pen and background objects. The apparent shift in
their positions is due, of course, to the movement of your head, and not to any
movement of the pen or background objects. This is an example of parallax –
again, the apparent shift in the position of objects due to your movement.
As mentioned, when Ptolemy speaks of the angular distances of the stars
remaining the same everywhere on the Earth, he is referring to the fact that we
cannot observe stellar parallax. Stellar parallax would be an apparent shift in the
position of stars (that is, a shift in where the stars appear relative to each other)
due to our movement. Ptolemy’s point is that, if the Earth were moving, either on
its axis or about the sun, then we should observe stellar parallax. Since we do not,
the Earth must not be moving.
To see this more clearly, suppose the Earth is spinning on its axis. As noted
above, the circumference of the Earth is roughly 25,000 miles, so if the Earth is
revolving on its axis, then every hour we are traveling about 1,000 miles. Suppose
we go out at night and carefully plot the position of several stars, then we wait
several hours and again carefully plot the position of those same stars. In between
these two observations we will (if the Earth is revolving on its axis) have traveled
several thousand miles, so since we have moved several thousand miles, we should
detect an apparent shift in the position of the stars we plotted earlier (again, the
change would be in the stars’ positions relative to each other). That is, we should
be able to detect stellar parallax. But we do not observe any such parallax. So – and
this is Ptolemy’s point – the Earth must not be revolving on its axis.

10 The Preface to Ptolemy’s Almagest

Once again, the situation is even more dramatic if we consider the possibility
that the Earth is orbiting the sun. Again, in Ptolemy’s time there was no good
estimate for the distance from the Earth to the sun, but we know it to be almost
100,000,000 miles, and they knew it had to be a substantial distance. Using our
known distance for this example, if the Earth is orbiting the sun, then we are
traveling almost 200,000,000 miles from one point in our orbit to the point where
the Earth would be six months later. Now, recall the example of parallax using
your pen and background objects. In that case, a movement of your head of just a
few inches resulted in a clearly detectable parallax. So if we are moving
200,000,000 miles, there would seem to be no way we could fail to observe
stellar parallax. But again, as Ptolemy points out, we do not observe such parallax,
and so we must not be in motion.
In short, Ptolemy’s argument from stellar parallax provides an extremely
strong, logically solid, empirically based argument that the Earth is not in motion.
As should be clear, this is again a case of disconﬁrmation reasoning, and as is
usually the case, there are various auxiliary hypotheses lurking beneath the
surface. Before reading on, you may want to pause and see if you can identify
the key auxiliary hypothesis in this case.
In this case, the key auxiliary hypothesis involves distances. You may have
noticed, in exploring examples of parallax (such as that of the pen), that the
amount of the apparent shift very much depends on the distance objects are from
you. In particular, the farther away objects are, the less the apparent shift. So one
explanation for the lack of stellar parallax would be that the stars are
unbelievably far away from us. But – and this is an important point in under­
standing our predecessors’ reasoning here – keep in mind that if the Earth is
moving about the sun, the distance we travel from one part of our orbit to the
farthest part is large – almost 200,000,000 miles. So for us to travel that large
distance, and there still to be no detectable stellar parallax, the stars would have
to be incredibly – and I do mean incredibly, unbelievably, almost inconceivably –
far away.
So the reasoning involved here is really more as follows: if the Earth is in
motion, and if the stars are not almost inconceivably far away, then we should
detect stellar parallax; but we do not detect such parallax, so either the Earth is not
in motion, or the stars are almost inconceivably far away.
As an almost ﬁnal note in this section, recall a point made in the previous
chapter, concerning our predecessors’ views on the size of the universe. They
considered the universe to be large, by their standards, but nothing like the size we
consider the universe to be. You and I have no problems considering the universe
to be unimaginably huge, but then you and I were raised with a worldview in
which a belief in a huge universe ﬁts. But a belief in such a huge universe would
not ﬁt comfortably into the Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle of beliefs. So given the
worldview of the time, the notion of an unimaginably huge universe was not really
a viable option. As such, the argument from stellar parallax provides another quite
strong argument for a stationary Earth.
As a genuinely ﬁnal note in this section, stellar parallax was eventually
observed, although the ﬁrst accurate measurement of it did not occur until
1838, almost 1,700 years after Ptolemy wrote the Almagest. And in fact, the

89

90

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

detection of stellar parallax currently provides some of the strongest empirical
evidence that the Earth does in fact orbit the sun.

The Earth as the Center of the Universe
If one accepts that the Earth is spherical and stationary, it would seem natural that
it would be located at the center of the universe. Indeed, the view of the Earth as
the center of the universe is one that ﬁts best with the other relevant beliefs.
Section 5 of the preface to the Almagest deals speciﬁcally with Ptolemy’s reasons
for viewing the Earth as the center. In this section, he refers in passing to a number
of Aristotle’s arguments from On the Heavens, and it seems clear that Ptolemy
endorsed Aristotle’s arguments. In what follows I will present somewhat of a
mixture of Aristotle’s and Ptolemy’s arguments.
For the ﬁrst argument, note that the Earth certainly appears to be the center
of the universe. The moon, sun, stars, and planets all appear to revolve around
the Earth, and it would seem natural to think that the common point around
which they all revolve – that is, the Earth – is the center of the universe. In other
words, an Earth-centered view would be the most straightforward option.
(Incidentally, it is widely known that the moon and sun appear to revolve
about the Earth, but somewhat less widely known that the stars and planets also
appear to revolve about the Earth. We will discuss such motions more fully in
the next chapter.)
In addition, recall that, on the Aristotelian worldview, the earth element has a
natural tendency to move toward the center of the universe, and the ﬁre element
has a natural tendency to move toward the periphery, away from the center. This
is, again, why heavy objects such as rocks fall and why ﬁre burns upward. Since the
Earth itself seems to be composed primarily of the earth element, and the natural
place for that element is the center of the universe, then the Earth itself would
naturally be located at the center of the universe.
Recall the discussion above about the behavior of objects in motion. I noted
that an object, such as the boulder in my front yard, will not move unless there is
something to move it. Since the Earth itself, being primarily composed of the earth
element, would naturally be located at the center of the universe, and since it (like
the boulder in my front yard) will not move unless something moves it, and since
there seems to be nothing that could possibly move the Earth (again, see the
discussion above), the most reasonable conclusion is that the Earth is naturally
located at the center of the universe, and it is not going to move from that
location.
The view that heavy objects have a natural tendency to move toward the center
of the universe gives rise to another consideration supporting the Earth-centered
view. Since we know (see the arguments above) that the Earth is spherical, and
given the observation above that dropped objects fall perpendicular to the surface
of the Earth, it follows immediately that the center of the Earth must be the center
of the universe. To see this, consider objects dropped from various locations on
the Earth. Those objects are moving toward the center of the universe, so the line
of their fall points toward the center of the universe. Since the various lines (of the

10 The Preface to Ptolemy’s Almagest

objects dropped from various locations) converge at the center of the Earth, it
follows that the center of the Earth is the center of the universe.
As with the arguments for a stationary Earth, notice how these arguments tend
to tie in with, and depend upon, other beliefs in the Aristotelian worldview. For
example, several of the arguments just mentioned depend closely on the view that
objects have natural places in the universe. This again reinforces the point from
Chapter 1, that the individual beliefs within a jigsaw puzzle of beliefs are closely
interconnected, and one cannot change many of the beliefs without substantially
altering the overall jigsaw puzzle.

Concluding Remarks
To return to a point made in the opening paragraphs of this chapter, our
predecessors had good reasons for believing the Earth was spherical, stationary,
and at the center of the universe. Their arguments for the Earth as spherical were,
as it turns out, absolutely correct. Their arguments for the Earth being stationary
and at the center of the universe turned out to be mistaken, but in ways that are
subtle and not at all obvious. As mentioned, it would take the combined efforts,
over many decades and even centuries, of many of the best-known names in the
history of science to ﬁgure out a new belief system compatible with a moving
Earth.
This completes our survey of the main arguments supporting the view of the
Earth as spherical, stationary, and at the center of the universe. Eventually
evidence would arise suggesting that the latter two beliefs were mistaken, and
this would cause serious problems for the Aristotelian worldview. And, as noted
earlier, eventually that worldview would be replaced by the Newtonian worldview.
The transition from the Aristotelian to the Newtonian worldview would impor­
tantly involve various theories as to the structure of the universe. Given this, our
next area of exploration is the data such theories needed to account for, after
which we will look into the various astronomical theories themselves.

91

92

11
Astronomical Data: The Empirical Facts
In a few chapters we will begin looking at the Ptolemaic, Copernican, Tychonic,
and Keplerian astronomical theories, with an eye toward understanding some of
the factors and issues involved in the transition from the old Aristotelian way of
looking at the universe, to the newer Newtonian view of the universe. This
transition importantly involved the astronomical theories just mentioned, so as
background to understanding these theories, we need to look at some of the data
the theories were primarily designed to handle.
As we discussed in earlier chapters, whatever else we wish from theories, they
must at a minimum be able to explain and predict the relevant data. In other
words, generally speaking there will be a body of facts that are relevant to a
particular theory, and the theory should be able to explain and predict these facts.
Moreover, as we discussed in Chapter 3, the notion of “facts” is not as
straightforward as it might at ﬁrst appear. In particular, we noted that some
facts are relatively straightforward empirical facts – the clearest examples of
which are straightforward observations, such as the observation that, where I live,
the body of light we call the sun appeared over the eastern horizon at 6:33 a.m. this
morning; and we noted that there are also philosophical/conceptual facts, that is,
beliefs that are generally strongly held, and often appear to be empirical facts, but
that turn out to be based more on one’s worldview than on straightforward
empirical observation.
The primary goal of the next two chapters is to explain the major facts, both
empirical and philosophical/conceptual, that are relevant to astronomical the­
ories such as those of Ptolemy, Copernicus, Tycho, and Kepler. In this chapter we
will focus on some of the more important empirical facts, and in the next chapter
we will turn to the philosophical/conceptual facts.
The Ptolemaic, Copernican, Tychonic, and Keplerian theories are astronomical
theories, and so the relevant facts these theories must explain and predict
primarily concern astronomical events. By “astronomical events” I mean events
concerning the heavenly bodies, such as the moon, sun, stars, and planets. Such
events largely involve their observed movements. What follows is not an
exhaustive catalog of the movement of these heavenly bodies, but it will provide
a good sense of the range of empirical facts the various astronomical theories
needed to explain and predict.
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

11 Astronomical Data: The Empirical Facts

Importantly, this is a chapter on the relevant empirical facts, and so when we
are speaking of movement, the emphasis is on the observed movement of the sun,
moon, stars, and planets. For example, when we speak of the movement of, say,
Mars, the issue is not whether Mars moves in an elliptical orbit, or a circular orbit,
or any other type of orbit. Rather, the emphasis is on the observed movement of
Mars. More speciﬁcally, there is a point of light, visible in the night sky, that by
convention we call “Mars.” That point of light moves in a particular way
(described more fully below). When we speak of the movement of Mars, then,
we are speaking of the straightforward, empirical, directly observable fact about
how that point of light moves across the night sky.
With that in mind, let’s begin with the observed movement of the stars.

The Movement of the Stars
The stars appear to move in a regular pattern, which repeats approximately every
24 hours. For example, suppose you are in the northern hemisphere, and you go
out at 9:00 p.m. to observe the stars. Suppose you focus on the movement of the
points of light we call the Big Dipper. During the night, you will notice the Big
Dipper moving in a circular motion, counterclockwise, around the point of light
we call the North Star. If you stand out there for an entire 24 hours, you will of
course lose sight of the Big Dipper during the daylight hours, but when darkness
returns you will see the Big Dipper apparently continuing its circular path around
the North Star. After 24 hours, at 9:00 p.m. the following night, you will notice the
Big Dipper is very close to the position it was in at 9:00 p.m. the previous night. In
short, the Big Dipper and other stars near the North Star appear to follow a
circular path, with the North Star at the center of the circle. Moreover, such stars
seem to complete a circle about the North Star approximately every 24 hours.
Suppose the next night you go out and observe stars farther away from the
North Star, say, stars that early in the evening are close to the eastern horizon. As
the night progresses, you will see these stars move in an arc (much like the arc the
sun makes moving across the sky), eventually setting below the western horizon.
Once again, if you observe for a full 24 hours, you will see the same stars in
approximately the same location as you saw them at that time the previous night.
Stars in the southern part of the sky also trace an arc across the sky, rising over
the southeastern horizon and setting over the southwestern horizon. And again,
such stars will be found close to their original position 24 hours later.
Two ﬁnal points are worth noting. First, the observations above assumed you
were viewing the stars from the northern hemisphere. If instead you were in the
southern hemisphere, you would be viewing different stars (for example, the
North Star would not be visible), but the pattern of movement would be
analogous to that described above.
Second, as each particular star moves across the sky (other than the North Star,
which does not move any noticeable amount), it remains in the same position
relative to the other stars. That is, the stars move as a group across the night sky. If
you pick out a particular star to observe, the star whose course you are plotting
will always remain in the same position relative to the other stars in the sky. This is

93

94

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

why the stars are traditionally referred to as the “ﬁxed stars.” They are not really
ﬁxed in place – they do appear to move about the Earth every 24 hours – but they
move as a group, remaining ﬁxed in place relative to each other.
In summary, the points of light we call the stars move in a predictable pattern,
and a pattern that has been recognized at least since the beginning of recorded
history. Let’s now move on to consider the movement of the sun.

The Movement of the Sun
The most straightforward movement of the sun is its daily movement across the
sky. The sun rises in the east, moves in an arc across the sky, sets in the west, and
then rises again approximately 24 hours later.
In addition, the point on the eastern horizon where the sun rises moves north
and south during the course of the year. On the day of the winter solstice (this will
be the ﬁrst day of winter, the shortest day of the year, falling on or near December
22), the sun rises at its most southern point on the eastern horizon. Over the next
few months, the point on the horizon at which the sun rises moves north, until on
or about March 22 (the day of the spring equinox, marking the ﬁrst day of spring)
the sun rises almost due east, and day and night are close to being equal in length
(for somewhat complicated reasons, and contrary to popular belief, day and night
are not quite equal on the day of the equinox, but that need not concern us here).
Again over the next few months, the point on the horizon where the sun rises
continues to move north, reaching its most northerly point on the day of the
summer solstice (marking the ﬁrst day of summer, the longest day of the year, on
or about June 21). Then the point of sunrise begins to move south, rising almost
due east on the day of the fall equinox (the ﬁrst day of fall, on or near September
22). Finally, for the next few months the point of sunrise continues to move south,
until on or near December 22 it again reaches its most southerly point, again
marking the ﬁrst day of winter. And this cycle repeats itself year after year, as it has
as far back as we know. (Incidentally, note again that I am describing the situation
from the point of view of the northern hemisphere. Similar movements of the sun
are observed in the southern hemisphere as well, though some of the descriptions
above – for example, of the seasons – would be different.)
Nor are these the only movements of the sun. The sun’s position in the sky,
relative to the ﬁxed stars, changes from day to day. Although we do not ordinarily
plot the position of the sun against the stars, it is not difﬁcult to do. If you go out at
sunset, and note what stars are visible on the western horizon immediately after
sunset, you will notice that the stars are in a slightly different position each
evening. Using the ﬁxed stars as a reference point, the sun appears to drift
eastward with respect to the stars. In other words, each day the sun is in a slightly
more eastward location with respect to the ﬁxed stars. (As we will see below, the
planets drift also. This is why, in astrology, the sun and planets are described as
being in different constellations at different times of the year. So, for example, as
the sun drifts eastward relative to the ﬁxed stars, it may be near the constellation
Capricorn one month, and hence in astrological circles be said to be in Capricorn,
then another month be in Pisces, and so on.)

11 Astronomical Data: The Empirical Facts

This completes the description of the more obvious motions of the sun. We will
now move on to brieﬂy consider the movement of the moon.

The Movement of the Moon
The motions of the moon are more complex, but we will just brieﬂy describe some
of the more obvious ones. On nights the moon is visible (which is most nights, but
by no means all), the moon, like the sun, rises in the east, moves in an arc similar
to the sun across the sky, and sets (not necessarily while it is still dark out) in the
west. Unlike the stars and sun, it does not rise again 24 hours later. Rather, each
night the moon rises later than it rose the previous night (the amount later varies
during the year, but on average is a bit less than an hour).
The moon also goes through a series of phases, taking a little over 29 days to
complete a cycle of phases. That is, the moon will sometimes be a crescent moon,
sometimes a half-moon, sometimes a three-quarters moon, sometimes full, and
so on. And whatever phase the moon is in tonight, it will again be in that phase a
little more than 29 days from now.
Like the sun, the moon also drifts eastward with respect to the ﬁxed stars, but it
drifts faster than does the sun. The moon returns to the same spot, relative to the
ﬁxed stars, about every 27 days. In other words, if you go out tonight and plot
the position of the moon relative to the stars, in a little over 27 days it will be in the
same relative position.
As mentioned, these are by no means the only motions of the moon, but they
are the more obvious motions. Let’s now turn to the more complicated issue of
the movement of the planets.

The Movement of the Planets
We need to be careful when discussing the planets. You and I were raised in a time
dominated by technology. We have been privileged to see photographs of planets,
both from technological marvels such as the Hubble space telescope and, in some
cases, from spacecraft that ﬂew close to, or even landed on, some of the planets.
As such, the image of a planet that immediately comes to our minds is very
different from the image of a planet that would have come to the mind of someone
living before modern technology. But keep in mind two important points. First,
our discussion is taking place as background for discussing astronomical systems
such as those of Ptolemy, Copernicus, Tycho, and Kepler, none of whom had
access to the sorts of technology we have. And second, we are discussing the
empirical facts, which again, in the most clear cases, consist of straightforward
observational data.
So the relevant question is, what sorts of direct, observational data do we have
about the planets? In other words, if we restrict ourselves to just straightforward,
naked-eye observation, what facts are there about the planets?
The ﬁrst point to note is that, on any given night, a point of light we call a
planet does not look appreciably different from a point of light we call a star.

95

96

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

In general, stars and planets look a lot alike. By the way, you may have heard
that stars twinkle, and planets do not, and there is some truth to this. But I
have never met anyone not already knowledgeable about the night sky who
could distinguish stars from planets based on whether or not the points of
light twinkle. It is only after one learns to distinguish stars from planets –
based on other criteria – that one can start to notice the twinkling/non­
twinkling aspect.
Moreover, on any given night the points of light we call stars, and those we call
planets, move in a similar way. That is, all the points of light, both stars and
planets, move across the night sky during a single night in the way described in the
section on the movement of the stars.
In short, if one does not already know how to tell stars from planets, then one
will not be able to distinguish any difference on any given night. However, from
at least the time of the earliest written records, our predecessors distinguished
ﬁve points of light in the night sky as being different from the thousands of
other points of light. The distinction was based primarily on the way those ﬁve
points of light moved, not on a single night, but over the course of many nights.
(Incidentally, we generally think of there being eight planets. But until the
eighteenth century, with advances in telescopes, the only known planets were
those visible to the naked eye, namely Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn.)
As mentioned, on any given night a planet, for example Jupiter, will appear to
move just as the stars move, and in general on a given night Jupiter will not look
appreciably different from a star. But, if you watch Jupiter carefully over the
course of several days or weeks, you will notice that, like the moon and sun, it
drifts with respect to the ﬁxed stars. Generally speaking, each night Jupiter will be
very slightly eastward, relative to the ﬁxed stars, of where it was the night before,
and over the course of weeks or months Jupiter will have drifted noticeably
eastward relative to the stars.
It is also worth noting that the planets, unlike the stars, vary noticeably in
brightness from time to time. For example, when Venus is visible it always appears
reasonably bright, but at times it is dramatically brighter than at other times
(when at its brightest, Venus appears as bright as the landing lights of an
approaching plane). The difference in brightness of the other planets is not as
dramatic as that of Venus, but nonetheless, the ﬁve planets visible with the naked
eye all differ noticeably in brightness from time to time.
In general, these are the only clear differences, based on naked-eye observa­
tions, between stars and planets. The thousands of points of light we call stars
have remained in ﬁxed positions relative to one another at least since the
beginning of recorded history, and generally the brightness of each star appears
to be pretty much the same over time. In contrast, ﬁve points of light – those we
call planets (after the Greek word for wanderer) – drift relative to the stars and
also appear more and less bright at different times.
Any adequate astronomical theory must be able to account for these empirical
observations. For example, such a theory must be able to take into account the
differing brightness and drifting of Jupiter, and be able to predict where Jupiter
will appear in the night sky a year from now.

11 Astronomical Data: The Empirical Facts

The drifting nature of the planets makes predicting their positions much more
difﬁcult than, say, predicting the positions of the stars. But the situation is more
complicated yet. For example, although Jupiter will generally drift slightly
eastward each night, relative to the stars, about once a year it will stop drifting
for a few days, and then start drifting the “wrong” way, that is, westward. Then
after drifting westward for a few weeks, it will again stop drifting for a few days,
and then resume its usual eastward drifting for about another year.
This curious, “backward” drifting of the planets is termed retrograde motion. All
of the planets exhibit retrograde motion, though not at the same intervals. Jupiter
and Saturn exhibit retrograde motion about once a year, Mars about once every two
years, Venus about every year and a half, and Mercury about three times a year.
The motion of the planets, especially this curious retrograde motion, would make
planets by far the most troublesome item in terms of developing an astronomical
theory that was good at explanations and predictions. However, as we will see
shortly, theories were developed that did an outstanding job at explanation and
prediction.
Before closing, a few ﬁnal empirical facts about the planets are worth mention­
ing. These facts seem fairly minor, and in a sense they are, but later they will play
substantial roles in deciding between competing astronomical theories. First,
Mercury and Venus never appear far from the sun. That is, wherever the sun is in
the sky, Mercury and Venus will be close. If you hold a foot-long ruler at arm’s
length, that will be about the maximum distance Venus will ever be from the sun,
and Mercury will be even closer.
A corollary of this fact is that you can see Mercury and Venus only either just
before sunrise or just after sunset. For example, sometimes Venus trails behind
the sun, so that when the sun sets, Venus will not be far behind in the western sky.
Again, Venus will never be much more than about a ruler’s length above the
western horizon, and Venus then sets in the western horizon within a few hours
after sunset. Or at some times of the year Venus is leading the sun, in which case
you can see Venus rising in the early morning before sunrise. At such times Venus
will be visible for at most a few hours before sunrise, after which we lose sight of it
in the glare of the sun.
Another seemingly minor fact, but one that would play a role later in arguments
for and against competing astronomical theories, concerns a correlation between
the apparent brightness of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, and the times at which these
planets are exhibiting retrograde motion. As mentioned, all the planets vary in
how bright they appear. Mars, for example, appears noticeably brighter about
every two years. Recall from the discussion above that Mars exhibits retrograde
motion about every two years. As it turns out, Mars’ retrograde motion and the
times at which Mars appears brightest are closely correlated. That is, Mars always
appears brightest around the same time it is in retrograde motion. Likewise for
Jupiter and Saturn – they also appear brightest during the same period as when
they exhibit retrograde motion.
Different astronomical systems will explain these seemingly minor facts in
different ways. As we will see in later chapters, some systems will explain these
facts in a more natural way, and this will factor into the debate over the correct
astronomical system.

97

98

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Concluding Remarks
The empirical facts that astronomical theories must respect are not simple, by any
means, but they are relatively straightforward. These facts have been known for a
long, long time – some of the earliest major civilizations, dating back thousands of
years, were well acquainted with them. As it turns out, these facts are not at all
easy to account for in an astronomical theory. That is, it proved to be quite
difﬁcult to develop a theory that accurately predicted and explained them. Before
moving on to consider such theories, we need to explore some other facts these
theories needed to respect. These are certain philosophical/conceptual facts,
especially concerning the motion of the moon, sun, stars, and planets, that play
important roles in the debate over competing astronomical theories. These
philosophical/conceptual facts will be the main topic of the next chapter.

99

12
Astronomical Data: The Philosophical/Conceptual Facts
In this chapter, we look at some of the key philosophical/conceptual facts relevant
to the astronomical theories with which we are concerned. The two such facts
playing the most important roles are what we earlier called the perfect circle fact
and the uniform motion fact. We ﬁrst discussed these in Chapter 3, and here we
explore them more carefully.
The perfect circle and uniform motion facts are reasonably easy to state. The
perfect circle fact is that heavenly bodies such as the moon, sun, stars, and planets
move in perfect circles (rather than having some other sort of motion, such as
elliptical). The uniform motion fact is that the motion of those heavenly bodies is
uniform, that is, they neither speed up nor slow down, but rather always move at
the same rate.
Although the facts are relatively easy to state, one cannot really understand
those facts, nor understand the depth of commitment our predecessors had to
those facts, without understanding the context in which those facts lived. So in
this chapter our main goal is not just to understand the perfect circle and uniform
motion facts, but also see how those facts ﬁt into the broader context of beliefs.
Exploring this topic will also provide a better idea as to how many of the pieces of
the Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle ﬁt together.
We will begin by considering a substantial scientiﬁc problem faced by our
predecessors. We will then look at how the perfect circle and uniform motion
facts ﬁt into the solution to this problem.

A Scientiﬁc Problem with the Motion of the Heavenly Bodies
At some point in our education (or at multiple points, as is often the case), most of
us were required to memorize the principle of inertia, also known as Newton’s
ﬁrst law of motion. This memorization process is so effective that most people I
know can still, years later, ﬂawlessly recite the principle. It is usually stated as
follows:
Principle of inertia: an object in motion remains in motion in a straight line,
and an object at rest remains at rest, unless acted upon by an outside force.
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

100

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

This principle was not recognized until the 1600s, and it took quite a lot of
effort, over quite a number of years, before it was clearly and accurately stated.
Galileo (1564–1642) came close to getting it right, and then Descartes
(1596–1650) was the ﬁrst to clearly state the principle. Newton (1642–1727)
later followed Descartes’ formulation, incorporating it into his science as his ﬁrst
law of motion.
Why did this principle, which currently is probably the most widely known (or
at least the most widely memorized) principle of science, take so long to work out?
In large part, the answer is that it runs counter to all our experience. Think about
your everyday experience with objects in motion. Can you think of a single case in
which an object in motion remained in motion? The fact is, in everyday
experience, objects in motion never remain in motion. They always come to a
halt. Thrown baseballs, thrown frisbees, dropped objects, bicycles, cars, airplanes,
acorns and apples that fall off trees, and in general, every object with which we are
familiar, comes to a halt unless something keeps it in motion.
In short, our everyday experience would lead us to a very different principle of
motion, and in fact, this principle of motion was the view of motion that seemed
obviously correct from the time of Aristotle to the 1600s. For convenience, I will
simply refer to this as the pre-1600s principle of motion.
Pre-1600s principle of motion: an object in motion will come to a halt, unless
something keeps it moving.
This principle of motion seems correct, based on everyday experience, and it
ﬁts in well with the views, within the Aristotelian worldview, that objects will
naturally tend to move toward their natural place in the universe. For example,
consider a falling rock. The rock is composed primarily of the earth element,
which again has a natural tendency to move toward the center of the universe. So
while a dropped rock is falling, what keeps it moving is its internal tendency to
move toward its natural place. It will, though, come to a halt, usually because it is
stopped by the surface of the Earth. And even if there were nothing such as the
surface of the Earth to stop the rock, it would still eventually come to a halt when
it reached its natural place at the center of the universe. In short, the view that an
object in motion will come to a halt, unless something keeps it moving, not only is
well supported by everyday experience, but also ﬁts in well with other beliefs
within the Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle of beliefs.
So far, so good. But there is one type of movement that is problematic, and that
is the movement of the heavenly bodies such as the moon, sun, stars, and planets.
In our everyday experience, these are the only objects that continue to move,
never coming to a halt. And these objects have been in motion, in a regular and
repeating pattern (as described in the previous chapter), at least since the
beginning of recorded history.
But if the heavenly bodies are in continuous motion, and if objects in motion
come to a halt unless something keeps them moving, it follows immediately that
there must be something keeping the heavenly bodies moving. What could this
source of motion be? What could keep the moon, sun, stars, and planets
continually moving?

12 Astronomical Data: The Philosophical/Conceptual Facts

We can draw one immediate conclusion about this source of motion. Whatever
it is, it cannot supply us with a full understanding of the movement of the heavenly
bodies if the source of motion is itself moving. To understand this point, consider
a typical cause of motion, as when I cause my pen to move across my desk by
pushing it with my ﬁnger. In this case, the source of motion – my ﬁnger – is itself
moving. But in this case, the movement of my ﬁnger must itself have a cause, so to
fully understand the motion of the pen, we must not only understand that the pen
is being moved by my ﬁnger, but also understand the source of motion for my
ﬁnger.
In general, if we have a source of motion that is itself moving, then that source
of motion must itself have a source of motion. And so a full understanding would
require understanding how the source of motion is moving.
Given this, we cannot explain the motion of the heavenly bodies by appealing to
any sort of cause that is itself moving. What must be causing the heavenly bodies
to move, then, must be a source of motion that is not itself moving. And there is
only one type of source of motion that does not itself move. Such a source of
motion is not one that jumps immediately to mind, and it is probably best
approached by way of example.
Suppose I am in a park, and I see my wife on the far side of the park.
Exclaiming “Ah, my beloved!” I begin to move toward my wife. Notice that she
herself may not be moving, and she may not even be aware that I am present.
But even though she is not moving, and is not even aware of my presence, she
nonetheless is the cause of my movement. She causes my movement by being an
object of desire, and in so doing she is a source of motion that is not itself in
motion.
Another example: suppose you see a $20 bill on the ﬂoor across the room, and
wanting it, you move toward it. Your desire for that bill is the source of your
motion, and in this way the money acts as a source of motion that does not itself
move.
Of course, the stars and planets do not move out of a desire for my wife. Or a
desire for money. But this sort of account seems to be the only way we can have a
source of motion that is not itself moving, and so this – an account involving an
object of desire – must be the same sort of source of motion that applies to the
heavenly bodies.
What kind of object of desire could be the source of motion for the heavenly
bodies? Aristotle had inherited a tradition, one that goes back so far that we
cannot be sure of its origins, of viewing the heavens as a place of perfection. The
perfection is rooted in the almost unchanging nature of the heavens, with the only
change being in the positions of the moon, sun, stars, and planets. As Aristotle
notes in On the Heavens, “throughout all past time, according to the records
handed down from generation to generation, we ﬁnd no trace of change either in
the whole of the outermost heaven or in any one of its proper parts.”
Whereas the heavens are a place of almost unchanging perfection, the only sort
of absolute perfection would be the perfection of the gods. So in something like
the way I move out of a desire to be near my wife, the heavenly bodies must move
out of a desire to emulate the perfection of the gods. The best way for the heavenly
bodies to emulate the perfection of the gods would be through perfect motion,

101

102

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

and perfectly circular motion, at uniform, unchanging speed, is the most perfect
sort of motion.
In summary, the gods provide a source of motion for the moon, sun, stars, and
planets. And the gods do so not by themselves moving, but rather by being an
object of desire. In particular, the heavenly bodies move in perfect circles at
uniform speed out of a desire to emulate the perfection of the gods. Given the
context of the time, and especially the need for a source of movement that itself
does not move, this seems the best explanation for the unchanging, perpetual
motion of the heavenly bodies.
Three cautionary notes
Three quick notes are in order before closing this section. First, the notion of
desire, as used above, is a tricky one for the modern ear. Just as we have notions
and concepts the Greeks did not have, the Greeks likewise had notions and
concepts that we do not have. One of these is a certain concept of an unconscious
desire, or what I prefer to think of as a natural, internal, goal-directed tendency.
This concept is unlike anything we currently have. The main sense of unconscious
desire we have is a Freudian sort of unconscious desire. But a Freudian
unconscious desire is used only in the context of a conscious agent, and so is
not at all the same notion as the Greek concept. In general, do not think of the
“desire” of the planets to move in perfect, uniform motion as in any way involving
the planets thinking to themselves “Gosh, I’d sure like to be like the gods, so I
think I’ll move around in perfect circles.” Rather, the “desire” is this unconscious
sort of desire, or, better, a natural, internal, goal-directed tendency.
Second – and this ties in to the point just made – we earlier discussed that
there were four basic elements (earth, water, air, and ﬁre) in the sublunar region
(that is, the region below the moon, including the Earth), with the ﬁfth element,
ether, found only in the superlunar region (that is, in the heavens, in the region
from the moon outward). It is really the element ether that has the unconscious
desire, or natural tendency, to emulate the perfection of the gods. That is, the
essential nature of ether is to move in perfect circles with uniform speed. In this
way, the general story involving ether is not much different from the general
story involving the four basic sublunar elements, earth, water, air, and ﬁre. For
example, recall that the earth element has a natural, goal-directed tendency (or
an unconscious desire) to reach the center of the universe, and this is the
essential nature of that element. And that is why, for example, rocks fall
downward. So likewise ether has an essential nature, and its essential nature
is to move in perfect circles at uniform speed. And that is why objects in the
heavens move the way they do.
Finally, Aristotle’s own notion of the gods should not be interpreted in any sort
of religious sense. Aristotle’s gods are real “things,” as they must be in order to be a
source of movement for the heavenly bodies. The gods are “unmoved movers,” in
the sense that they are the source of motion, yet without themselves moving.
Aristotle’s own discussion of the gods is complicated, and there is controversy
over how his writings on the gods should be interpreted. But it is clear that
Aristotle thought of the gods as being a sort of intellectual perfection, and even

12 Astronomical Data: The Philosophical/Conceptual Facts

more clear that his gods are not in any way religious gods. For example, these gods
had nothing to do with the origin of the universe, they are unaware of anything
happening on the Earth, they are unaware of our existence, and as such it would
be pointless to pray to them. In later centuries, after Aristotle, when Judaic,
Islamic, and Christian philosophers and theologians more or less mixed religion
in with Aristotelian views, Aristotle’s nonreligious gods were transformed into the
religious God of Judaic, Islamic, and Christian tradition. This religious God
continued to provide the needed explanation for the continual motion of the
heavenly bodies.

Could This Account Be Used for a Moving Earth?
In Chapter 10, we explored the reasons behind viewing the Earth as spherical,
stationary, and at the center of the universe. Recall that some of the reasons for a
stationary, central Earth involved the claim that there was nothing that could keep
the Earth in motion.
I am often asked whether an account, similar to that above, could have been
used to explain a moving Earth. If the explanation of the constantly moving
heavenly bodies is rooted in the view that their internal essence is to continually
move in perfect circles, why not tell a similar story for the Earth? Why couldn’t
our predecessors have said the essence of the earth element was to move in circles,
say in circles about the sun, and use that as an explanation for a moving Earth?
The question is a good one, and seeing the answer to it helps illustrate the
interconnections between beliefs in the Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle of beliefs. The
answer is not that viewing the earth element as having an internal essence to move
in circles (again, say in an orbit around the sun) is inherently contradictory. After
all, if it is all right to view ether as having an internal essence to move in circles, it
cannot very well be inherently contradictory to say something similar about the
earth element.
So the answer to the question is not a matter of a circular-moving earth element
being inherently contradictory. Rather, the answer involves considering whether a
circular-moving earth element would ﬁt into the overall jigsaw puzzle of beliefs.
And as it turns out, it will not ﬁt, and that is why viewing the earth element as
having an internal essence to move in circles is not a viable option.
To see this, suppose we try to accept that the earth element has an internal
tendency toward circular movement. Notice that right away we lose our explan­
ation for a wide range of the most obvious daily phenomena. For example, we can
no longer explain why rocks fall. Rocks are presumably composed mainly of the
earth element, and when released, they move in a straight line toward the Earth.
But they should not move like this if the tendency of the earth element were to
move in a circular fashion.
Likewise, we lose our explanation for what keeps us on the surface of the Earth.
Again, the Aristotelian explanation is that we are composed mainly of the heavy
elements earth and water, and the natural tendency of those elements is to move
downward, and that is what keeps us on the Earth. But again, if we view the earth
element as having a natural circular motion, then we lose this explanation.

103

104

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Moreover, the idea that the earth element has a natural tendency toward
continual circular motion clashes with the simple observation that the earth
element is the heaviest element. The Earth, being a massive body composed of the
heaviest element, would be by far the heaviest object in the universe. In contrast,
ether was viewed as a special, very light (perhaps weightless) element. As Ptolemy
notes in the preface to the Almagest, it does not make much sense to have the
heaviest, most difﬁcult-to-move object in the universe be in continual motion.
Instead, it makes more sense to view the heaviest object in the universe as being
stationary, and have the lightest objects – those composed of ether – be in
constant motion.
In short, viewing the Earth as moving due to the earth element having a natural
tendency toward circular movement is not a viable option, in that this view is
inconsistent with the overall jigsaw puzzle of beliefs. More generally, adopting the
notion that the Earth is in motion at all, for whatever reason, would require
constructing an entirely new jigsaw puzzle, a new worldview. Eventually such a
new jigsaw puzzle would be constructed, but not until new discoveries were made,
mostly in the 1600s. And as mentioned several times above, constructing this new
jigsaw puzzle would take a great deal of work, time, and talent.

Concluding Remarks
As noted above, and also as noted by Aristotle, the idea that the heavens are a
place of perfection goes back to the beginnings of recorded history. The idea is
understandable, in that the special, beautiful objects in the sky move in
unchanging, repeating patterns, and these patterns have not changed for thou­
sands and thousands of years. Aristotle himself inherited the tradition of the
heavens as a region of perfection, and when he developed his views, much more
fully than had those before him, this idea of perfection remained.
As we saw above, the idea of the heavens as a region of perfection provided a
way to understand how the heavenly bodies could be in continual motion. But the
explanation carried with it the notion that the heavenly bodies must move in
perfect circles and at uniform speeds. These facts – perfect circles and uniform
motion – became extremely well entrenched. It is difﬁcult to overemphasize how
obvious these facts would have seemed to our predecessors. It was a matter of
common sense – everyone simply knew – that planets move in perfect circles and
at uniform speeds. These were obvious facts, and facts that did not appear to be
appreciably different from the empirical facts we explored in the previous chapter.
In hindsight, we can recognize that the perfect circle fact and uniform motion
fact were not facts at all. They were philosophical/conceptual “facts,” beliefs that
seemed like empirical facts but instead turned out to be rooted more in the overall
system of beliefs. In subsequent chapters, we will explore how these facts – both
the empirical facts discussed in the previous chapter and the perfect circle and
uniform motion facts – were incorporated into the Ptolemaic and Copernican
systems.
Finally, as a bit of foreshadowing, in Part III of this book we will see how certain
facts that we hold – facts that seem to us to be obvious, empirical facts – have

12 Astronomical Data: The Philosophical/Conceptual Facts

turned out, in light of recent discoveries, to be mistaken philosophical/conceptual
“facts.” In a sense, then, we are in a similar situation to that of our predecessors in
the 1600s. Just as new discoveries forced them to rethink beliefs they had long
taken as obvious facts, so too recent discoveries force us to rethink some of our
basic beliefs about the sort of universe we inhabit.

105

106

13
The Ptolemaic System
The transition from the Aristotelian worldview to the Newtonian worldview
involved, in important ways, competing theories as to the structure of the
universe. In the next few chapters, we look at the central astronomical theories
involved in this transition, some Earth-centered and some sun-centered. We will
begin with a look at the Ptolemaic system.
The main goal of this chapter is to provide an overview of this system, as it was
presented in Ptolemy’s Almagest, published around 150 CE. As noted earlier, the
Almagest is a substantial and technical work, composed of 13 books spanning
about 700 pages. We will begin with some background material on Ptolemy’s
system, and then look at some of the details of the system.

Background Information
As with any theory, Ptolemy’s system needed to respect the relevant facts. In this
case, the relevant facts consist largely of the empirical facts discussed in
Chapter 11, as well as the philosophical/conceptual facts of circular, uniform
motion discussed in the previous chapter.
Generally speaking, Ptolemy’s system succeeds at respecting these facts. His
system clearly respects the perfect circle fact, in that his entire approach is based
on using only perfect circles for the motions of the heavenly bodies. As we will see
below, he has some difﬁculties with the uniform motion fact, but he manages at
least in some sense to respect this fact.
With respect to the empirical facts, his system does an especially nice job. That
is, when it comes to explaining and predicting the facts discussed in Chapter 11,
although his system is not perfect (few theories are), the margin of error is low. For
example, if we use Ptolemy’s system to predict, say, where Mars will appear in the
night sky on this date a year from now, or if we use the system to predict when and
for how long Mars will next exhibit retrograde motion, the prediction will be very
close to what we observe. It is very much worth emphasizing that no other theory
of the universe before Ptolemy, nor for 1,400 years after Ptolemy, was anywhere
close to his with respect to prediction and explanation. It is ﬁtting that the name
by which we know this work, Almagest, was given it by Arabic translators and
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

13 The Ptolemaic System

derives from a phrase meaning simply “the greatest.” Although the theory may
appear somewhat archaic to our eyes, the Ptolemaic system was a spectacularly
impressive accomplishment.
We should take a moment to clarify what Ptolemy did and did not do. Ptolemy’s
approach is a mathematically based one, and he makes intricate use of various
mathematical devices. Most of the mathematical devices he employs, however,
were not original to him, but had been discovered in earlier centuries.
Nor, of course, was Ptolemy the ﬁrst to develop an Earth-centered view of
the universe. As we saw earlier, the view that the Earth was spherical, stationary,
and at the center of the universe goes back to before Aristotle, 500 years before
Ptolemy.
So Ptolemy did not originate the general Earth-centered approach that he takes,
nor did he originally develop the mathematical devices that he employs. But what
he did was take these rough notions and develop them into a precise theory, and a
theory capable, for the ﬁrst time in history, of providing accurate predictions
concerning astronomical events. Or to put the point another way, before Ptolemy
there were at best rough sketches, rather than anything that could properly be
used in making predictions about astronomical events. With Ptolemy came a
precisely crafted theory, capable of impressively accurate predictions and
explanations.
As a ﬁnal note in this section, you will sometimes hear that Ptolemy’s system is
not really a system, in the proper sense of the word. In a sense, this is correct, in
that Ptolemy treats each of the heavenly bodies in an isolated, rather than uniﬁed,
way. For example, one book of the Almagest deals exclusively with Mars, another
exclusively with Venus, another with the sun, and so on, without ever providing a
uniﬁed system of the entire universe. In that sense, one might say that Ptolemy’s
approach is not strictly speaking a system of the universe, but rather a collection
of independent treatments of the various components of the universe. I will,
however, continue to use the word “system” to describe Ptolemy’s theory, since all
these independent treatments add up to an approach that can be used to make
predictions for all of the components of the universe.
With these background observations in mind, we will move on to consider an
overview of the Ptolemaic system. For ease of discussion, we will focus on just one
planet, in this case, Ptolemy’s treatment of Mars. Let’s begin with a description of
the components involved in Ptolemy’s treatment of Mars, and then discuss the
rationale behind those components.

A Brief Description of the Components of Ptolemy’s
Treatment of Mars
Figure 13.1 illustrates the key components of Ptolemy’s treatment of Mars. Here,
Mars moves around a point, labeled point A in the diagram. The circle this
movement traces out, that is, the small circle that has A as its center, is called
an epicycle.
The center of the epicycle, that is, point A, itself moves around on a larger circle
that has point B as its center. A larger circle such as this is called either a deferent or

107

108

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Figure 13.1 Treatment of Mars on the Ptolemaic system.

an eccentric, depending on whether B is located at the center of the system (in this
case, the center of the Earth), or is instead displaced from the center of the system. In
this particular case, this is an eccentric, since as you can see, the center of the
movement of the epicycle, point B, is not centered on the center of the Earth.
To clarify the distinction between deferents and eccentrics, note the Earth is at
the center of Ptolemy’s system. That is, the outermost boundary of the system is
the sphere of the ﬁxed stars (this is the periphery of the universe), and since the
Earth is at the center of that sphere, the Earth is at the center of the system. If point
B coincided with the center of the Earth (that is, the center of the system), then the
large circle centered on B would be termed a deferent. On the other hand, if, as in
Figure 13.1, point B is not at the center of the system, then the larger circle is
termed an eccentric.
In short, deferents and eccentrics are basically the same, in that both are the larger
circles on which epicycles revolve. Think of an eccentric as an off-centered deferent.
The equant point is a point involved in the speed at which Mars’ epicycle
moves. The equant point is the most difﬁcult component to explain, and so I will
hold off on the details until we consider the rationale for these components.
Finally, this sort of a structure – that is, an epicycle moving on a larger circle – is
termed an epicycle–deferent system. For convenience, we will call such an
arrangement an epicycle–deferent system even if, strictly speaking, the system
employs eccentrics rather than deferents.

The Rationale behind These Components
The Ptolemaic treatment of Mars is clearly somewhat complicated, with circles
moving on circles, some circles off-centered, and with the still mysterious equant
point involved. What were the reasons for these components?
First, epicycle–deferent systems are enormously ﬂexible, in the sense that an
extremely broad range of motions can be produced simply by varying the size,
speed, and direction of motion of the components. That is, in any epicycle–
deferent system, one has a broad range of options in how large or small one makes
the epicycle and the deferent, one likewise has a broad range of options in how fast

13 The Ptolemaic System

Figure 13.2 The ﬂexibility of epicycle–deferent systems.

one has the planet moving on the epicycle, also how fast one has the epicycle
moving on the deferent (or on the eccentric, as the case may be), and one also has
the option of having the movement on the epicycle and deferent be either
clockwise or counterclockwise.
This ﬂexibility allows one to produce a wide range of motions, simply by
adjusting these options. For example, all of the motions shown in Figure 13.2 were
produced by an epicycle moving on a deferent. The dotted lines represent the path
traced out by Mars as it moves on its epicycle, as the epicycle itself is moving
around the Earth. All of these motions (and a wide variety of other motions as
well) can be produced simply by varying factors such as the size of the epicycle, the
size of the deferent (or eccentric), the speed at which Mars moves on its epicycle,
the speed at which the epicycle moves, and so on.
So epicycle–deferent systems are useful for the amount of ﬂexibility they
provide. But in addition, any Earth-centered approach needs epicycles (or some
method at least as complex as epicycles) in order to account for the retrograde
motion of the planets. Recall from Chapter 11 that retrograde motion is when a
planet appears to move “backward” from its usual motion. For example, Mars
usually drifts slightly eastward each night relative to the ﬁxed stars, but about
every two years Mars will drift westward for a few weeks, before resuming its usual
eastward motion for another two years.

109

110

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Figure 13.3 Position of Mars against the backdrop of the ﬁxed stars.

To see how epicycles are used to account for retrograde motion, suppose we
focus on the Earth, Mars, and the ﬁxed stars. If we draw a line of sight from the
Earth, through Mars, to the stars, that line will show where Mars will appear, as
viewed from the Earth, in the night sky against the backdrop of the stars (see
Figure 13.3).
Now suppose we imagine Mars moving on its epicycle, with the epicycle
moving around the Earth. If we draw continual lines of sight from the Earth
through Mars, this will indicate where Mars will appear in the night sky, over the
course of time, against the backdrop of the stars (see Figure 13.4). The numbers in
Figure 13.4 represent the consecutive positions of Mars. As you see, Mars usually
appears to move in one direction against the backdrop of the stars. That is,
numbers 1 to 7 represent a steady motion eastward relative to the ﬁxed stars.
Then at 8, Mars has just begun to drift westward. Mars continues drifting
westward at 9 and 10, and then from 11 to 15 resumes its usual eastward drifting.
And in general, this is how an epicycle–deferent system accounts for retrograde
motion. In fact, if one is committed to an Earth-centered system, with uniform
circular motion, then epicycles turn out to be the best way to account for
retrograde motion.
Incidentally, it should be noted that the sizes and speeds of the epicycle and
deferent in these diagrams are not the correct sizes and speeds for Mars. These

13 The Ptolemaic System

Figure 13.4 Explanation of retrograde motion on the Ptolemaic system.

sizes and speeds were chosen to make for a simpler illustration. But by adjusting
the sizes and speeds (and using eccentrics, as described below), one can get the
“backward” appearance of Mars’ motion to work out so that the model accurately
predicts and explains when Mars is actually exhibiting retrograde motion.
Let’s now turn to the question of why Ptolemy used an off-center deferent,
that is, an eccentric. The reason is simply that, if one uses a simple epicycle and
deferent (again, the deferent would be a circle centered on the Earth), then
one cannot get the model to make accurate predictions and explanations. That is,
the model simply will not do what you need it to do, namely, make accurate
predictions and explanations. But either of two modiﬁcations to the simple
combination of epicycle and deferent will produce a model that quite accurately
predicts and explains the motion of Mars.
The ﬁrst option is to introduce an additional, small epicycle on the epicycle
shown in Figure 13.1 above. The result would be as pictured in Figure 13.5. This
additional epicycle adds even more ﬂexibility to the model. With this additional
ﬂexibility, one can now adjust the model such that the predictions and expla­
nations concerning Mars will be extremely accurate.
Such additional epicycles are sometimes called minor epicycles, to distinguish them
from the major epicycles, such as the single epicycle pictured in Figure 13.1 and the
larger epicycle pictured in Figure 13.5. The difference between major and minor

111

112

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Figure 13.5 Minor and major epicycles.

epicycles is that major epicycles are the ones needed to handle retrograde motion.
Major epicycles also provide ﬂexibility, but their primary function is to account for
retrograde motion. In contrast, minor epicycles are not needed to handle retrograde
motion, but rather are used to give the model additional ﬂexibility.
As mentioned, adding minor epicycles is one way to get the predictions and
explanations for Mars to come out right. The other option is to move the deferent
off center, that is, to use an eccentric. This option is what is pictured in
Figure 13.1.
Either option – adding a minor epicycle or using an eccentric – will work to get
the predictions and explanations back in line with the observed data. In fact, the
two options are mathematically equivalent, so either will work equally well.
Ptolemy chose to use eccentrics, and thus the construction for Mars looks as it
does in Figure 13.1.
The ﬁnal component to explain is the equant point. This also involves a
problem with getting the model to correctly predict and explain the observed
data. In particular, this problem is tied to the philosophical/conceptual fact of
uniform motion. Recall that the two key philosophical/conceptual facts the
Ptolemaic system needed to respect were the perfect circle fact (that all motions
of heavenly bodies are perfectly circular) and the uniform motion fact (that the
motion of heavenly bodies is uniform, that is, neither speeding up nor slowing
down).
If you look at the ﬁgures in this chapter, you can note that the Ptolemaic system
clearly respects the perfect circle fact. That is, all motions are in terms of perfect
circles. We have actually only looked at the treatment of Mars, but in all of
Ptolemy’s constructions, all minor and major epicycles, deferents, and eccentrics
are perfect circles. So clearly, there is no problem respecting the perfect circle fact.
The uniform motion fact is a different matter, and provides a problem for
Ptolemy’s system. This problem is sometimes difﬁcult to see, so let’s approach it
slowly.
First, note that the speed and direction something appears to be moving will
depend on the point of view from which one considers the motion. For example,

13 The Ptolemaic System

suppose you are on a train with a bag at your feet. From your point of view, that
bag is not moving – it remains in the same position relative to you and your feet.
But from the point of view of someone not on the train, your bag (and you, and
everyone else on the train) is moving. Again, this is simply the point that whether
something is moving, and, if so, with what speed and in what direction, is relative
to the point of view chosen.
So when we consider the uniform motion fact, which again requires that the
movements involved be uniform, a legitimate question is “uniform relative to
what point of view?” And the natural answer to this would be “uniform relative to
whatever is the center of the movement.”
If we look just at the movement of Mars on its epicycle, there is no problem.
That movement is indeed uniform, that is, as Mars moves around the center of the
epicycle, it moves with uniform speed relative to that center.
But now consider the motion of the center of the epicycle. If we ask “What
should this motion be uniform relative to?” there are two natural answers. The
ﬁrst would be to say that the center of the epicycle should move with uniform
speed relative to the center of the entire system, that is, relative to the center of the
Earth. The second would be to say that the center of the epicycle should move
with uniform speed relative to the center of the eccentric on which it moves.
The problem is, if you take either of these options – that is, if you make the
motion of Mars’ epicycle uniform relative either to the center of the Earth or to
the center of Mars’ eccentric – the system won’t work. When I say it won’t work, I
mean simply that your predictions and explanations will not be accurate. In other
words, if Ptolemy tries to respect the uniform motion fact in the most straightfor­
ward way, his system will not handle the data in an acceptable way. That is, the
predictions and explanations are no longer accurate.
One option for addressing this problem would be to abandon the uniform
motion fact. But again, this was a well-established fact, and had been for centuries
before Ptolemy, and even before the time of Aristotle. Moreover, as discussed in
the previous chapter, the uniform motion fact is closely tied to the understanding
of how the heavenly bodies move, so abandoning this fact would likewise mean
abandoning the long-held understanding of what accounts for the motion of the
heavenly bodies. In short, giving up the uniform motion fact was not really a viable
option.
Ptolemy’s other option was to make the motion of Mars’ epicycle uniform
relative to some point other than the center of the Earth or the center of the
eccentric. This was the option Ptolemy adopted. As it turns out, one can calculate
a point, within the eccentric on which Mars’ epicycle moves, such that if Mars’
epicycle moves with uniform speed relative to this point, then the model will
come back in line with the data. And this point is what is called the equant point.
In summary, the equant point for Mars is the point with respect to which Mars’
epicycle moves with uniform speed. But that point is a somewhat contrived point,
calculated so as to make the predictions come out accurate, rather than being
either of the places from which you would expect the movement to the uniform.
This, then, completes the overview of the main components needed to handle
the motion of Mars. Clearly, this is a complex apparatus. But, to a remarkable
degree of accuracy, it works.

113

114

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Concluding Remarks
Above, we described only the parts of the Ptolemaic system that concern Mars.
This treatment of Mars should be sufﬁcient to provide a ﬂavor for the Ptolemaic
system. As noted, Ptolemy treats each of the ﬁve planets, the moon, the sun, and
stars separately. The treatment of the other planets, and to some extent the moon
and sun, bear similarities to the treatment of Mars. That is, generally speaking, the
constructions needed to account for the motions of the other planets are similar
(though not identical) to those for Mars, with the planets requiring their own
epicycles, eccentrics, and equant points. The apparatus needed to account for the
motions of Mercury and the moon are somewhat more complex than those
described above for Mars, while handling the motions of the sun is somewhat
less complex. In general, it should be clear that the Ptolemaic system is a quite
complex collection of constructions for handling the sun, moon, stars, and
planets.
But – and this is a crucial point – in spite of its complexity, the Ptolemaic
system did a marvelous job at handling the data, providing for the ﬁrst time in
history the ability to accurately predict and explain an extraordinarily wide range
of astronomical data.

115

14
The Copernican System
In the previous chapter we looked at the Ptolemaic system. As we saw, Ptolemy’s
system was quite successful in terms of predicting and explaining the relevant
data. Although the theory was modiﬁed in the centuries following Ptolemy’s
death, the modiﬁcations were relatively minor, and the dominant astronomical
theory for the next 1,400 years was essentially that of Ptolemy.
In the 1500s, Nicolas Copernicus (1473–1543) developed an alternative theory
of the universe. Copernicus developed his system early in the 1500s, and
published it the year he died. One of our main goals in this chapter will be to
see how the Copernican system works. In addition, we will look at a brief
comparison of the Copernican and Ptolemaic systems, including a discussion
of which system provides the more plausible model of the universe. Finally, we
will explore the question of what motivated Copernicus, with particular emphasis
on ways in which certain philosophical/conceptual beliefs inﬂuenced his work.

Background Information
The Copernican system is a sun-centered system. Today we view the sun as the
center of our solar system, but notably, Copernicus’ system did not merely have
the sun at the center of the revolution of the planets; rather, he placed the sun at
the center of the entire universe.
In many ways the Copernican system is like the Ptolemaic system, but with the
position of the Earth and sun swapped. For example, like Ptolemy, Copernicus
viewed the stars as all being equidistant from the center of the universe,
embedded in the so-called sphere of the ﬁxed stars. As it did for Ptolemy, this
sphere deﬁned the outermost boundary of the universe. Copernicus’ universe was
larger than Ptolemy’s, that is, the sphere of the ﬁxed stars was larger and further
away than generally believed by advocates of the Ptolemaic system, but the
Copernican universe, like Ptolemy’s, was relatively small compared to our
conception of the size of the universe. And also as with the Ptolemaic system,
the Copernican system used epicycles, deferents, and eccentrics, though notably it
did not require equant points. Again, generally speaking the Copernican system
had a great many similarities to the Ptolemaic system, with the most obvious
difference being the positions of the sun and Earth.
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

116

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

It is also worth noting that Copernicus was dealing with essentially the same
empirical facts as was Ptolemy (again, the main such facts are covered in
Chapter 11). The data was not exactly the same – in the 1,400 years separating
Ptolemy and Copernicus, some new astronomical observations had been made,
some existing observational mistakes had been corrected, and quite a few new
observational mistakes had been introduced (either by mistaken observations or
by mistakes in copying records). But, generally speaking, the empirical data
available during Copernicus’ time was still based on naked-eye observation, and
this data was similar to the data with which Ptolemy worked.
In addition, it is worth stressing that Copernicus was ﬁrmly committed to the
same key philosophical/conceptual facts as was Ptolemy. That is, Copernicus
ﬁrmly believed (as did almost all his contemporaries) that an acceptable model of
the universe must respect the perfect circle and uniform motion facts.
There are a number of widespread misconceptions about Copernicus and the
Copernican system. Most notable are the misconceptions that the Copernican
system is vastly simpler than the Ptolemaic system; that the Copernican system is
better than the Ptolemaic at prediction and explanation; and that Copernicus
discovered or proved that the Earth orbits the sun. But as we will see shortly, these
are mistaken. The Copernican system is easily as complicated as the Ptolemaic
system, and no better (or worse) at prediction and explanation than is the
Ptolemaic system. And until new data appeared early in the century that followed
(primarily from the newly invented telescope), the available evidence would
continue to strongly support the view that the Earth was the center of the
universe. When authors claim the Copernican system is simpler than Ptolemy’s,
and superior at prediction and explanation, they most likely are thinking of
Kepler’s system, which was not developed until 70 years after Copernicus’ death,
and which is the subject of a later chapter.
With this background material in mind, let’s look at an overview of the
Copernican system.

Overview of the Copernican System
As we did with the Ptolemaic system, we will simplify matters by focusing on the
motion of a single planet. We will again use Mars as an example, and again begin
with a picture. It should be noted that, in Figure 14.1, the circles are not drawn to
scale, but rather are drawn so as to be more easily distinguishable. On the
Copernican system, Mars moves in a circle around point A (again, a small circle
such as this is called an epicycle). Point A moves in a circle around point B (again,
such circles are known as deferents or, if off-center, eccentrics). Point B also
moves, but as it moves it remains in a ﬁxed position relative to point C. Point C is
the center of the eccentric on which the Earth moves (to simplify the picture, the
Earth is not shown in this diagram, but if the Earth were in the picture, point C
would be the center of its eccentric). Point C moves in a circle around point D, and
ﬁnally, point D moves in a circle around the sun. Not for nothing did I say the
Copernican system was as complicated as the Ptolemaic.

14 The Copernican System

Figure 14.1 The treatment of Mars on the Copernican system.

Again, much like the Ptolemaic system, the Copernican system employs
epicycles, deferents, and eccentrics, in a complicated system of circles on circles.
Notice, however, that there is no equant point in the diagram, and in fact the
Copernican system does not require equant points. Also, although the Coperni­
can system does require epicycles, these epicycles are used for the ﬂexibility they
provide, but, unlike the Ptolemaic system, they are not needed to account for
retrograde motion.
If we ask the question “Why did Copernicus need this complex apparatus?” the
answer, in a nutshell, is that without it the predictions and explanations do not
work out. In other words, as with the Ptolemaic system, by using these compli­
cated devices, Copernicus was able to work out a system that does a quite good job
at explanation and prediction (as good as, though not better than, the Ptolemaic
system). And without such devices, Copernicus was unable to get the model to
match the known data. In short, just like the Ptolemaic system, the Copernican
system is complicated, but when all is said and done, it works – that is, to a
remarkable degree of accuracy it explains and predicts the relevant data.
So far, we have only discussed the motion of Mars. On the Copernican system,
the apparatus needed to account for the other outer planets, that is, Jupiter and
Saturn, is similar to that shown in the diagram above. The apparatus needed for
the Earth is somewhat less complicated, as is that for the moon. Finally, the
devices used for the movement of the inner planets, Mercury and Venus, are more
complicated than those for Mars. In short, it should be clear that the Copernican
system is easily as complicated as the Ptolemaic system.

Comparison of the Ptolemaic and Copernican Systems
Respecting the facts
As discussed in earlier chapters, whatever else we wish from scientiﬁc theories,
they must be able to predict and explain the relevant data. In this regard – that is,

117

118

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

in terms of accuracy with respect to accounting for the empirical data – the
Ptolemaic and Copernican systems are essentially the same. Neither is perfect, but
both are quite good. For example, if we use each of these systems to predict where
Mars will appear in the night sky exactly a year from now, or to predict exactly
when the summer solstice will occur for the next 10 years, or to predict any of a
vast range of astronomical events, each will provide predictions that closely match
the facts.
With respect to the philosophical/conceptual facts of perfectly circular and
uniform motion, the Copernican system is slightly better. Both systems respected
the perfect circle fact, that is, both systems modeled the motion of the planets and
stars using only perfect circles. But recall from the previous chapter that the
Ptolemaic system respects the uniform motion fact only by using the rather
strained device of equant points. In contrast, Copernicus managed to eliminate
this hedge, and was able straightforwardly to respect the uniform motion fact.
Again, even though these “facts” sound quite alien to our ears, most of Ptolemy’s
and Copernicus’ contemporaries were committed to them, and so respecting
them is a matter of some importance. It is worth noting that Copernicus himself
considered his elimination of equant points to be one of the most important
reasons for preferring his theory.
In short, there is little difference between the Ptolemaic and Copernican
systems in terms of predicting and explaining the empirical facts. With respect
to the relevant philosophical/conceptual facts, the Copernican system respects
the uniform motion fact in a somewhat more straightforward way.
Complexity
There is little difference between the two systems in terms of complexity. For
example, if we look at the types of devices required (such as epicycles, deferents,
eccentrics, and the like), as well as the number of such devices employed, the
Copernican and Ptolemaic systems are about equally complicated. Even though
the complexity of systems such as this cannot be precisely quantiﬁed, and so it is
not possible to compare exactly the complexity of the two systems, I think we can
all agree on this point: both systems are very complex, and with respect to
complexity, there is little to distinguish them.
Retrograde motion and other more “natural” explanations
Recall the Ptolemaic explanation of retrograde motion, that is, the occasional
“backward” motion of the planets. In the Ptolemaic system, each planet required a
major epicycle, the primary purpose of which was to account for the retrograde
motion of the planet. In contrast, retrograde motion receives a quite different
explanation on the Copernican system. Again we will use Mars as an example, but
similar accounts apply for the retrograde motion of the other planets as well.
On the Copernican system, the Earth is the third planet from the sun, and Mars
is the fourth planet. Moreover, the Earth completes about two revolutions about
the sun for every one revolution Mars completes. As a result, about every two
years the Earth catches up to and then passes Mars. During the period in which

14 The Copernican System

Figure 14.2 Explanation of retrograde motion on the Copernican system.

the Earth is passing Mars, Mars appears, from the Earth, to move backward
against the backdrop of the stars. Figure 14.2 may help illustrate this point. The
lines are again the lines of sight drawn from the Earth, through Mars, out to the
stars, and will show where Mars will appear against the backdrop of the stars.
Note that the lines usually move in one direction, representing the usual eastward
drift of Mars relative to the ﬁxed stars. For example, in 1 to 3, Mars is shown in this
usual eastward motion, then in 4 to 6, Mars is drifting westward, and then in 7 and
8, Mars has resumed its usual eastward drifting.
Regarding retrograde motion, recall the seemingly minor empirical fact dis­
cussed at the end of Chapter 11, that Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn all appear brightest
around the same time they exhibit retrograde motion. Looking again at
Figure 14.2, we can see why this would be expected. On the Copernican system,
Mars will undergo retrograde motion only when the Earth catches up and passes
Mars. Note that this will be the time at which Earth and Mars are closest together,
and so one would expect Mars to appear brighter at these times. The same story
goes for Jupiter and Saturn as well – that is, they too will undergo retrograde
motion only around those times when they are closest to the Earth. So the
correlation between the retrograde motions of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, and the
times at which those planets appear brightest, has a quite natural explanation on
the Copernican system.

119

120

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Speaking of more natural explanations, recall also the other seemingly minor
piece of empirical evidence discussed at the end of Chapter 11, that Venus and
Mercury never appear far from the sun. On the Copernican system, Venus and
Mercury are inner planets (that is, they are between the Earth and the sun). So no
matter where Venus and Mercury are in their motions around the sun, when
viewed from the Earth they must appear to be in the same region of the sky as the
sun.
In short, the Copernican system has a more natural explanation for retrograde
motion, for the correlation between retrograde motion and the apparent bright­
ness of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, and for the fact that Venus and Mercury always
appear to be close to the sun. And these are all advantages of the Copernican
system.
From a realist standpoint, which system is the more plausible model of the
universe?
Recall our earlier discussion on instrumentalism on the one hand, and realism on
the other. Again, instrumentalism is an attitude toward a theory in which one is
primarily concerned with how well the theory predicts and explains the relevant
data. Realism, on the other hand, is an attitude in which a theory is expected not
only to predict and explain, but to model or picture the way things really are.
Almost everyone took the various devices of these systems, such as epicycles,
with an instrumentalist attitude. That is, these were generally viewed not as
physically real, but rather as mathematical devices necessary to make accurate
predictions and explanations. So the issue of realism generally does not arise for
devices such as epicycles.
But the realist issue is very much relevant for the Earth-centered versus suncentered parts of these two theories. So a legitimate question is, from a realist
perspective, which model of the universe – Ptolemy’s Earth-centered approach, or
Copernicus’ sun-centered approach – is the more plausible model of the
universe?
With respect to this question, the data available at the time strongly supports
the Ptolemaic system. Recall the arguments from Chapter 10, supporting the
conclusion that the Earth was stationary and at the center of the universe. These
are all strong arguments (though they eventually turned out to be mistaken, albeit
for subtle reasons), and so with respect to the question of which system was better
matched to the best science of the day, the answer is clear: the Ptolemaic system is
far better than the Copernican.
In summary, the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems are comparable in terms of
prediction, explanation, and complexity. In eliminating equant points, the
Copernican system more straightforwardly respects the uniform motion fact,
and it more straightforwardly accounts for retrograde motion, for the correlation
between the differences in brightness of the planets and their times of retrograde
motion, and for the fact that Venus and Mercury always appear near the sun.
These seem to be relatively small advantages, however, compared with the
evidence available at the time that pointed to a stationary Earth, which was
more consistent with the Ptolemaic system.

14 The Copernican System

What Motivated Copernicus?
As noted in the discussion above, the Copernican system was much like the
Ptolemaic system. For example, both systems make extensive use of epicycles,
deferents, and eccentrics. In most respects (except for the elimination of equant
points and the explanation of retrograde motion) the Copernican system was no
better than the Ptolemaic system, and in some important respects (for example,
on the issue of whether it is more reasonable to believe the Earth is stationary or in
motion), the Copernican system is much worse off than the Ptolemaic system.
So if the Copernican system had only a handful of minor advantages, and had
the substantial disadvantage of being incompatible with the current best physics,
then what in the world would have motivated Copernicus to develop his system?
Life is short, yet Copernicus devoted much of his life to working out his system. If
there were good reasons to think that the Earth could not be in motion, then why
would Copernicus spend so much of his life developing a theory that seems like it
could not possibly be correct?
I do not intend, in this section, to attempt a full answer to this question. We can,
however, use this question to explore how philosophical and conceptual issues
can motivate the work of a scientist such as Copernicus. In particular, various
scholars have argued that Copernicus’ leanings toward Neoplatonism, and his
commitment to the philosophical/conceptual beliefs about perfectly circular,
uniform motion, were key motivating factors in the development of his suncentered system. What follows is an outline of these views.
Neoplatonism
In a nutshell, Neoplatonism is sort of a “Christianized” version of Plato’s
philosophy. Plato lived about 400 BCE, and, roughly speaking, he believed there
is a wide variety of objectively existing, nonphysical, eternal “forms.” These forms
are the objects of knowledge, that is, when we acquire a piece of knowledge, as
opposed to having a mere belief or opinion, our knowledge is knowledge of one or
more of these forms. For example, when we come to know the Pythagorean
theorem, or other truths of mathematics, we have acquired knowledge not of
objects here on earth (for example, a drawing of a right triangle), but rather we
have acquired knowledge of an objectively existing, nonphysical, eternal form.
According to Plato, the forms involve not only truths of mathematics, but
“higher” forms as well, such as forms of truth and beauty (such forms are “higher”
not just in the sense that they are more difﬁcult to grasp, but more important as
well). The highest form of all is the form of the Good. Plato says little directly
about the form of the Good. But he does make clear that this form is the highest,
most important form.
Instead of trying to describe directly the form of the Good, Plato speaks
metaphorically about this form. In particular, he always uses the sun as his
metaphor for the Good. For example, he says that, just as the sun is the source of
all life, so too the form of the Good is the source of all truth and knowledge.
Likewise, in his allegory of the cave, Plato describes a prisoner who has escaped
the cave and is ﬁnally able to gaze upon the sun. In this allegory, the prisoner

121

122

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

represents the lover of wisdom who has completed his or her intellectual journey,
escaping ignorance (represented by the cave), and eventually coming to under­
stand the highest truth of all, the form of the Good (represented by the sun). In
short, in the allegory of the cave, as always, the sun is Plato’s metaphor for the
Good.
Several hundred years after the death of Plato, the movement called Neo­
platonism incorporated Plato’s philosophy into Christianity. I will ignore most of
the details of Neoplatonism, and just emphasize that, for a Neoplatonist, Plato’s
form of the Good becomes identiﬁed with the Christian God. And the sun –
Plato’s metaphor for the Good – now comes to represent God.
As a philosophy, Neoplatonism has come and gone at various times in western
history. During the time of Copernicus, it was a not uncommon philosophy, and
although the evidence linking Copernicus to Neoplatonism is not as clear as one
would like, it is very likely that Copernicus would have been exposed to
Neoplatonic ideas during his student years. And some of what Copernicus writes
certainly sounds as if it is coming from someone with Neoplatonic leanings. Based
on such passages, and on Copernicus’ likely exposure to Neoplatonism during his
student years, a number of scholars have argued that Copernicus was heavily
inﬂuenced by Neoplatonism. I should note, however, that other scholars are less
convinced. But if Copernicus was inﬂuenced by Neoplatonism, the connection to
a sun-centered view is straightforward: if one views the sun as the physical
representation of God in the universe, then the appropriate place for the
representation of God would be the center of the universe. On this account, a
primary reason why Copernicus pursued a sun-centered view of the universe
stemmed from philosophical beliefs that were substantially inﬂuenced by
Neoplatonism.
Copernicus’ commitment to uniform, circular movement
I have discussed, at numerous points, how deeply committed most astronomers
were to the belief that the motion of the stars and planets had to be perfectly
circular, and uniform in the sense of never speeding up or slowing down. In
hindsight, this commitment was primarily a philosophical/conceptual commit­
ment. Although there is a small amount of empirical evidence supporting the
belief (for example, the stars do appear to move in a circular fashion), the degree
of commitment to this belief far outstripped the empirical evidence for it.
As described in the previous chapter, Ptolemy was only able to respect the
uniform motion fact by using the rather strained device of the equant point. By
way of quick review, the epicycle of a planet such as Mars moves with uniform
speed relative to an imaginary point, called the equant point. A line drawn from
the equant point to the center of Mars’ epicycle will sweep out equal angles in
equal time, and in this sense, Mars’ epicycle moves with uniform speed relative to
the equant point. But Mars’ epicycle most decidedly does not move with uniform
speed relative to the Earth, or relative to the center of the circle around which that
epicycle moves.
Given the fact that the Ptolemaic system was able to account quite well for the
empirical data, and as such was a very useful and valuable model, almost all

14 The Copernican System

astronomers were willing to accept the fudge factor of the equant point.
Copernicus, however, was not. He was simply too committed to the uniform
motion view to accept a device such as the equant, and this commitment also
helped motivate him to develop a system that did not require equant points.
This is a good illustration of the way in which it was not empirical data, but
rather, philosophical/conceptual “data” that helped motivate Copernicus to
develop his theory. As it turns out, this is not a particularly unusual event. In
the history of science, it is often (though not always) philosophical/conceptual
commitments that in part motivate scientists to develop new theories. So in this
respect, Copernicus was not an unusual scientist at all.
As a ﬁnal point in this section, it is worth noting that we all have such
philosophical/conceptual beliefs, many of which are so embedded in our way of
thinking that they appear to be straightforward empirical facts. When we look
back in history, it is relatively easy to identify beliefs, such as the perfect circle and
uniform motion facts, that were primarily philosophical/conceptual in nature. It
is also relatively easy to see how such facts motivated scientists such as Coper­
nicus. In contrast, it is very difﬁcult to put our ﬁngers on our own philosophical/
conceptual commitments that are masquerading as empirical beliefs. Later in this
book, when we turn to some examples from more recent science, we will attempt
to ﬂesh out some of our own philosophical/conceptual commitments.

The Reception of the Copernican Theory
Recall that all the evidence of the time pointed to a stationary Earth, and so it
seemed that Copernicus’ theory could not possibly be correct. Given this, one
might think that his theory would have been immediately dismissed, and would
certainly not have been widely read or discussed.
But in fact, in the years following Copernicus’ death (the same year his system
was published), and continuing through the remainder of the 1500s, his theory
was widely read, discussed, taught, and put to practical use. Part of the reason for
this was that Copernicus’ system was the ﬁrst thorough, sophisticated astronom­
ical system published in the 1,400 years since Ptolemy. People of his time were
justiﬁably impressed, with some referring to Copernicus as a “second Ptolemy.”
Another reason involved the production of astronomical tables. Such tables
were the primary way that an astronomical system, such as Ptolemy’s, was put to
practical use. An analogy might help clarify this. Suppose I need to ﬁnd out about
some astronomical event – for example, suppose I am planning a late-afternoon
outdoor social, and I need to know what time the sun will set. It would be possible
for me to compute the time of sunset from our current best astronomical theories,
but it would be extremely burdensome to do so. What I would do instead is take
the much simpler route – I would probably go to the Internet and search for
information on what time the sun sets.
The data on sunset times I would ﬁnd on the Internet (or in other sources, such
as a current almanac) is derived from our current astronomical theories, but the
people who put together this data have done all the hard work. Astronomical
tables were somewhat similar. They were derived from the current best theory –

123

124

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

for most of our history, this would have been the Ptolemaic theory – and then
those who needed astronomical data would use the tables as a source.
In the 1500s, a new set of astronomical tables was badly needed (the previous
set had been produced in the 1200s, and were out of date). As it turns out, the
astronomer who produced these new tables based them on Copernicus’ theory.
Again, since the Copernican and Ptolemaic systems were essentially equivalent
with respect to prediction and explanation, this astronomer could have used
either system and arrived at about equally good tables. But he used the Coperni­
can system, and this both publicized it and gave it added prestige.
So in the second half of the 1500s, the Copernican system was widely known,
widely read, and widely taught in European universities. Importantly, though, it
was taken by almost all with an instrumentalist attitude. That is, with few
exceptions (there were some Neoplatonists who took it realistically, as well as
a few others) the Copernican system was used as a practical device, but not one
that people thought reﬂected the way the universe really was. In short, in the late
1500s the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems coexisted peacefully. (At least, this
was true among astronomers – there were some attacks by religious leaders who
vigorously opposed the Copernican system, but for religious, not empirical,
reasons.) Generally speaking, among astronomers the Ptolemaic system was
taken with a realist attitude (or at least, the Earth-centered part of the theory
was taken realistically), and the Copernican system was taken with an instru­
mentalist attitude. That is, the Copernican system was taken as a system that was
useful, though not one that reﬂected the way the universe really was.

Concluding Remarks
In this chapter, we have looked at an overview of the Copernican system,
compared this system with the Ptolemaic system, discussed Copernicus’ motiva­
tion for developing his system, and noted that the Copernican system was well
received, albeit with an instrumentalist attitude, by astronomers in the late 1500s.
This presentation was rather brief, covering a lot of ground in a fairly short space,
but it should convey at least a good ﬂavor of the Copernican system and some of
the key issues surrounding it.
This relatively peaceful situation would change dramatically in the early 1600s.
At this time the telescope was invented, and this produced, for the ﬁrst time since
at least the beginning of recorded history, new astronomical data. In the next two
chapters we will look brieﬂy at two more key astronomical systems, and then turn
to the new data generated by the telescope.

125

15
The Tychonic System
In this brief chapter, we look at an overview of the Tychonic astronomical system.
This system is, in a sense, a blending of parts of the Ptolemaic and Copernican
systems. Since it is mainly a rearranging of familiar components rather than an
employment of new components, we can get a good overview of it fairly quickly.
We will begin with some brief introductory material.
Tycho Brahe (1546–1601) was a respected astronomer of the second half of the
1500s. His principal contributions were the development of an alternative
astronomical system, now called the Tychonic system, and his decades of extra­
ordinarily accurate empirical observations. His astronomical observations were
crucial in the development of Kepler’s system, but this is an issue we will discuss in
the next chapter. For now, let’s take a brief look at Tycho’s astronomical system.
As with most astronomers of the time, Tycho was well acquainted with the
Copernican system. And he respected the fact that in some ways the Copernican
system had advantages over the Ptolemaic system. For example, as discussed in
the previous chapter, the Copernican system’s explanation of retrograde motion
was more straightforward and, in a sense, more elegant than the Ptolemaic
explanation.
But as was also the case with most astronomers of the time, Tycho recognized
that the preponderance of the evidence pointed toward a stationary Earth, and so,
speaking from a realist standpoint, the Copernican system could not be the
correct model of the universe. Tycho was, however, able to develop a system that
included most of the perceived advantages of the Copernican system, but at the
same time keeping the Earth as the center of the universe.
On the Tychonic system, the Earth is the center of the universe, and the sphere
of the ﬁxed stars again deﬁnes the periphery of the universe. The moon and sun
revolve around the Earth. The planets, however, revolve about the sun. That is,
although the Earth is stationary and at the center of the universe, and the moon
and sun revolve about the Earth, the center of the movement of the planets is the
sun. A simpliﬁed picture of the Tychonic system, leaving out components such as
the various epicycles, is given in Figure 15.1. It is not obvious from the description
or the picture, but in fact, the Tychonic system is mathematically equivalent to
the Copernican system. That is, it is possible to mathematically transform the
Copernican system into the Tychonic system (or vice versa). Given this, the
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

126

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Figure 15.1 The Tychonic system.

Tychonic system is equivalent to the Copernican system in terms of predicting
and explaining the empirical data discussed in Chapter 11. In particular, exactly as
with the Copernican system, the Tychonic system is good, but not perfect, when it
comes to handling this empirical data.
As mentioned, one of the perceived advantages of the Tychonic system was that
it allowed one to keep the advantages of the Copernican system, while at the same
time keeping the Earth as the center of the universe. So although the Tychonic
system looks somewhat odd to our eyes, it incorporates the most appealing
features of the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems.
Moreover, shortly after Tycho’s death, the newly invented telescope would
provide new evidence suggesting that at least some of the planets revolve around
the sun. The Tychonic system then became an alternative that would allow one to
accept that the planets moved around the sun, in keeping with the newly
discovered evidence, but at the same time keep the Earth stationary, in keeping
with the evidence and arguments discussed in Chapter 10. In short, the Tychonic
system became a viable compromise way of keeping certain attractive features of
both the Earth-centered and the sun-centered approaches.
As a brief aside, it is worth mentioning that the Tychonic system is still alive
today. In recent years there have been no fewer than four books published
defending the Tychonic system as the correct model of the universe (or more
precisely, defending a Tychonic system that has been modiﬁed slightly, for
example, by eliminating epicycles and incorporating elliptical orbits). There is

15 The Tychonic System

no shortage of people (most, including the authors of the books just mentioned,
are motivated by a literal reading of certain religious scriptures) who continue to
believe the Earth is the center of the universe. And if one is committed to an
Earth-centered view, then the Tychonic system is the best alternative.
This, then, completes our brief overview of the Tychonic system. We will
discuss one more important system, that of Kepler, and then move on to consider
the new evidence that became available with the invention of the telescope.

127

128

16
Kepler’s System
In this chapter, we will explore the system developed by Johannes Kepler
(1571–1630), as well as explore some of the factors that motivated Kepler. As
we will see, Kepler essentially “got it right.” That is, Kepler was the one who ﬁnally
developed a system that not only was completely accurate with respect to
prediction and explanation, but was also vastly simpler than any alternative
system. Moreover, speaking from a realist point of view, his system seems to
describe the way the moon and planets really do move. In fact, Kepler’s view of the
movements of the moon and planets is basically the same model we have today.
Kepler was an interesting individual. We will explore not only the system he
developed, but also some of the reasons that motivated him to work on developing
a new system. As we saw with Copernicus, some of these reasons involved factors
that seem clearly to be more philosophical/conceptual than scientiﬁc. But before
exploring this, we will begin with some background material.

Background Information
Kepler was born in 1571, several decades after the publication of the Copernican
system, and several decades before the invention of the telescope, which would
provide new empirical data supporting a sun-centered view. When he was in his
late twenties, Kepler worked for the astronomer and observer Tycho Brahe,
whom we discussed brieﬂy in the previous chapter. His collaboration with Tycho
was brief, because Tycho died less than two years after Kepler joined him. But
Tycho’s inﬂuence on Kepler was crucial in the eventual development of Kepler’s
system. Given this, a few words on Tycho’s inﬂuence on Kepler are in order.
Tycho Brahe’s empirical observations
As noted in the previous chapter, Tycho’s principal contributions were the
development of the Tychonic system, and his extraordinarily accurate empirical
observations. In the previous chapter, we explored brieﬂy his astronomical
system. But Tycho’s astronomical observations proved much more important
in Kepler’s eventual development of his system.
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

16 Kepler’s System

In a nutshell, Tycho was by far the most careful, accurate, and diligent observer
of his time, and for that matter, probably the best naked-eye observer of all time.
Over the course of 20 years, Tycho collected extremely accurate data (the
accuracy was essentially to the limit of what is possible with naked-eye observa­
tion) on the movement of the sun, moon, and planets. He collected an especially
large amount of data on the observed position of Mars, and it was largely the data
on Mars that would prove to be a crucial factor in Kepler’s development of his
system.
Tycho and Kepler
Following Tycho’s death, Kepler took possession of key parts of the data Tycho
had accumulated, and it was largely this access to Tycho’s data that made it
possible for Kepler to work out his system.
By no means should this be taken as suggesting that Kepler’s work was any sort
of easy or straightforward extrapolation from Tycho’s data. Kepler worked
extraordinarily hard developing his system, and it took him many years to hit
upon the right approach. The data concerning Mars proved especially important,
as Kepler was able to deduce that none of the alternatives – not the Ptolemaic, nor
the Copernican, nor the Tychonic system – could fully account for Tycho’s
observed positions of Mars. Given this, it was clear to Kepler that none of these
systems was quite right.
Kepler began working on alternative approaches, focusing on the movement of
Mars. Notably, his alternative approaches were based on a sun-centered view.
There are a variety of reasons for this, but partly it stemmed from his student days,
during which he was taught by an ardent supporter of the Copernican system.
Incidentally, at this point it is something of a misnomer to speak of Kepler’s
“system,” since his early work focused only on providing a treatment of Mars.
However, eventually his success with Mars was extended to the remaining
planets, the sun, and the moon, and so could then properly be called a system.
For convenience, I will continue to speak of Kepler’s system, with the under­
standing that the complete account would be some years off.
As with almost all of his contemporaries, Kepler was originally committed to
the perfect circle and uniform motion facts. Thus, he spent a fair amount of time
trying to modify the Copernican system, with the sun at the center, and with all
movement given in terms of perfect circles and uniform motion. And Kepler did,
in fact, make some important improvements to the Copernican system.
But by the very early 1600s, Kepler was able to deduce, primarily from Tycho’s
data, that no system based on uniform motion could account for the observed
positions of Mars. He then began exploring alternatives, allowing Mars to move
with varying speeds during different parts of its orbit. Not much later, Kepler
likewise concluded that no system based only on perfect circles would be able to
account for the observed motion of Mars, and so he began exploring orbits of
varying shapes.
Importantly, note that Kepler had, at this point, abandoned the two key
philosophical/conceptual facts of perfectly circular and uniform motion. Below,
we will explore some of the factors that made it easier for Kepler, in contrast to

129

130

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

most astronomers who preceded him, to consider movements other than
uniform, circular movements. For now, though, we will continue with the outline
of Kepler’s progress.
Kepler eventually discovered that elliptical orbits, with the planets moving at
varying speeds during the course of their orbits around the sun, could account
perfectly for the data on Mars. In 1609 he published his model for the motion of
Mars, with an elliptical orbit and with Mars moving at varying speeds, and soon
afterward extended this approach to cover the remaining planets. We will now
move on to look more carefully at Kepler’s approach.

Kepler’s System
Let’s begin by looking at Kepler’s key innovations – elliptical orbits and varying
speeds – in more detail.
You may know that an ellipse is sort of an elongated circle. An ellipse can be
given an exact mathematical characterization, but the easiest way to visualize an
ellipse is to imagine two pins holding the ends of a string to a piece of paper. Now
imagine pulling the string taut with a pencil, and moving the pencil around the
pins, keeping the point of the pencil on the paper. The resulting ﬁgure will be an
ellipse. Figure 16.1 may help. The points occupied by the pins are called the foci of
the ellipse. As mentioned, Kepler’s ﬁrst innovation was to have the planets move
about the sun in elliptical orbits, with the sun occupying one of the foci of the
ellipse. For example, the orbit of Mars would be as shown in Figure 16.2. In the
diagram, the ellipse is greatly exaggerated for the purposes of illustration.
This description of planetary orbits – that planets orbit the sun in elliptical
orbits, with the sun occupying one of the foci of the ellipse – is known as Kepler’s
ﬁrst law of planetary motion.
Kepler’s other major innovation was to have the planets move at varying speeds
during the course of their orbits around the sun. More speciﬁcally, on Kepler’s
system, a line drawn from the planet to the sun will sweep out equal areas in equal
time. This description of the speed of planets is known as Kepler’s second law of
planetary motion, and it is most easily illustrated by the diagram in Figure 16.3. To
understand Kepler’s second law, suppose there is a line connecting Mars and the
sun. In the 30 days between January 1 and January 30, that line will sweep out a
certain area (area A in the diagram). According to Kepler’s second law, during any
other 30-day period, that line will sweep out an area of equal size. For example, in
the 30 days between November 1 and November 30, the line will sweep out a
Figure 16.1 An ellipse.

16 Kepler’s System

Figure 16.2 Orbit of Mars on Kepler’s system.

Figure 16.3 Illustration of Kepler’s second law.

certain area (area B in the diagram). According to Kepler’s second law, area A and
area B will be equal. And in general, a line connecting a planet to the sun will
sweep out equal areas in equal times.
Kepler’s second law has an important implication for the motion of planets.
Since a planet, for example Mars, is closer to the sun at certain points in its orbit
(in this illustration, Mars is closest on the left side on the diagram), that planet (in
this case Mars) must move faster during this part of its orbit, and move more
slowly when it is in the part of its orbit furthest from the sun. In other words, given
Kepler’s second law, the motion of planets is not uniform. Rather, the speed of a
planet varies at different places in its orbit.
Kepler’s system, with its use of elliptical orbits and nonuniform planetary
motion, was able to predict and explain the empirical facts perfectly. Moreover, it
is far simpler than either the Ptolemaic or the Copernican system. With respect to
simplicity, notice that Kepler’s system uses no epicycles, deferents, eccentrics,
equant points, or the like. Instead, there is simply one elliptical orbit for each
planet, and that is all.
But note also that Kepler’s system abandons both the perfect circle fact and the
uniform motion fact. Recall that these two facts were central beliefs for over 2,000
years. So although Kepler’s system handled the empirical data wonderfully, it
would require substantial conceptual changes in the Aristotelian worldview.

What Motivated Kepler?
From what we have discussed so far, one might get the impression that Kepler was
a reasonably straightforward investigator, motivated mainly by a desire to develop
theories to handle the empirical facts. Kepler was actually a much more complex

131

132

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

ﬁgure than this. As with our earlier discussion concerning Copernicus, I will not
attempt a full exploration of the various factors involved in Kepler’s development
of his system, but instead provide enough information to give a ﬂavor of the sort of
philosophical/conceptual issues involved in Kepler’s discoveries. In particular, we
will focus on an aspect of Kepler that motivated him throughout his life, namely,
his desire to read the mind of God.
Kepler’s desire to read the mind of God
Throughout his life, Kepler was convinced God had a deﬁnite plan, a blueprint, so
to speak, in constructing the universe. And Kepler was passionately driven to
discover this blueprint, to read the mind of God and know the plan God put into
place when the universe was created. Kepler’s desire would manifest itself in a
variety of ways, a few of which will sufﬁce to illustrate.
Recall that when he was in his late twenties, Kepler went to work for Tycho
Brahe. Why did Kepler want to work with Tycho? Much of the answer to this lies
in a “discovery” Kepler had made a few years earlier, and exploring Kepler’s
discovery will help illustrate the sort of blueprint Kepler envisioned God as
having, and what reading the mind of God would entail.
Kepler’s ﬁrst substantial publication came about four years before he went to
work for Tycho, and in it Kepler announced a discovery he would consider
important throughout his life. Kepler was concerned with questions such as why
God created a universe with exactly six planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn), rather than, say, a universe with ﬁve or seven or some other
number of planets. And why did God space the planets the way he did, rather than
using some other spacing? Kepler was convinced there were answers to questions
such as these.
For some years, Kepler had tried a variety of answers to such questions. For
example, he tried answers that appealed to various mathematical ratios and
functions, none of which provided a satisfactory answer. But in the mid-1590s,
Kepler hit upon the idea of answering such questions by appeal to what are called
the perfect solids. A brief explanation of these solids is in order. Incidentally, bear
with me through this discussion, as this will take a bit of time to explain. When we
are ﬁnished, though, I think you will have a much better idea of the rather unusual
person Kepler was.
Consider a cube, which is probably the clearest example of a perfect solid. A
cube is a three-dimensional ﬁgure, where each face is identical; in particular, each
face is a square. Note that a square is itself a two-dimensional ﬁgure, where again
each component (that is, each side) is identical; in particular, each side is a line
identical in length to all the other sides. And in general, a perfect solid has these
same characteristics of the cube: each face of a perfect solid is an identical twodimensional ﬁgure, and the two-dimensional ﬁgure is itself composed of identical
components, that is, lines of equal length.
Since the ancient Greeks, it has been known that there are only ﬁve perfect
solids. These ﬁve are the following: (a) a cube, with 6 faces, each face being a
square; (b) a tetrahedron, with 4 faces, each face being an equilateral triangle; (c)
an octahedron, with 8 faces, each face being an equilateral triangle; (d) a

16 Kepler’s System

dodecahedron, with 12 faces, each face being a pentagon; and (e) an icosahedron,
with 20 faces, each face being an equilateral triangle.
Now, suppose we take a sphere of arbitrary size, and inside it we just ﬁt a cube.
That is, we put a cube that is just the right size so that the corners of the cube just
touch the sides of the sphere. Then suppose that, inside this cube, we just ﬁt
another sphere, that is, we put in a sphere that is just the right size so that the sides
of the sphere just touch the sides of the cube. Although we are dealing with threedimensional ﬁgures, a two-dimensional drawing of this would look like
Figure 16.4.
Now suppose we continue to nest solids and spheres, in the following order.
We next place a tetrahedron of just the right size inside the innermost sphere in
Figure 16.4, then another sphere inside this, then a dodecahedron, then another
sphere, then an icosahedron, then another sphere, then an octahedron, and ﬁnally
one last sphere. The resulting construction will look like Figure 16.5 (again, this is
a two-dimensional representation of what is really a three-dimensional construc­
tion, but it will give a good idea of the result).
Again, bear with me as we make some ﬁnal observations about this construc­
tion. Let’s make some notes about the spheres. Note that the size of the sphere we
begin with will determine the size of the cube we place in it, which in turn
determines the size of the sphere we put in the cube, and so on. That is, the size of
the original sphere will determine the size of all the other spheres, and will
likewise determine the actual distance between each sphere.

Figure 16.4 Nested sphere, cube, and sphere.

133

134

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Figure 16.5 Kepler’s construction.

But although the actual distance between each sphere depends on the choice of
the size of the ﬁrst sphere, the relative distances between the spheres do not. That
is, regardless of what size sphere we begin with, the relative distances between the
spheres remain the same. This is perhaps easier to see if we look at a drawing of
just the spheres. That is, Figure 16.6 is just like Figure 16.5, except that the ﬁve
solids have been removed to make the spacing of the spheres more obvious.
Again, no matter what size sphere we begin with when we build this construction
of spheres and perfect solids, the relative distances between the spheres will be as
illustrated in Figure 16.6.
Now, at this point a good question is: What does any of this have to do with
astronomy? The answer is this: on the Copernican (or any other sun-centered
system), it is possible to ﬁgure out the relative distances between the planets. And
as it turns out, the relative distances of the planets are quite close to the relative
distances between the spheres in Kepler’s construction.
This is an interesting fact, and there is little doubt in my mind that this fact is
merely a curious coincidence about our solar system. But not so in Kepler’s mind.
To Kepler, this was his ﬁrst big breakthrough in reading the mind of God. The
construction in Figure 16.5 is what God had in mind in constructing the universe
– God wanted to model this construction, reﬂecting relationships between
spheres and the perfect geometric solids. This is why God created the universe

16 Kepler’s System

Figure 16.6 Kepler’s construction with the solids removed.

with six planets – one for each sphere in the above construction – rather than
with ﬁve or seven or some other number of planets. This is why God created the
universe spacing the planets the way he did – the spacing of the planets reﬂects
the spacing of the spheres in Kepler’s construction. In addition, every corner of
the outermost and hence most prominent of the solids, the cube, has three lines
going off at right angles to one another, and in this God was reﬂecting the three
dimensions of space in the universe. And so on.
As mentioned, this was Kepler’s ﬁrst major “discovery,” and it was, in fact, one
of the primary reasons he wished to work for Tycho Brahe. That is, he wanted to
work with the best observer of the time, partly to help conﬁrm his discovery. This
discovery was announced in his ﬁrst major publication. But his desire to read the
mind of God, and his conviction that this system of nested spheres was a key
component in God’s blueprint, was a lifelong commitment for Kepler. For
example, much later, near the end of his life, Kepler would expand on the
approach described above, incorporating into it musical harmonies such that
God, in constructing the universe, was reﬂecting not merely geometrical struc­
tures, but musical ones as well. In short, Kepler’s construction with the solids, and
his desire to read the mind of God, did not merely reﬂect the youthful Kepler. As
Thomas Kuhn put it, in a turn of phrase I rather like, Kepler’s construction with
the perfect solids “was not simply a youthful extravagance, or if it was, he never
grew up” (Kuhn 1957, p. 218).

135

136

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Kepler’s construction with the perfect solids did not directly lead him to the
discoveries for which he is best remembered, namely the elliptical orbits with
varying speeds. But his passion for discovering the regularities God included in
constructing the universe – the kind of passion reﬂected in his lifelong commit­
ment to the construction involving the solids – did lead to the key discoveries that
we remember as Kepler’s ﬁrst and second laws of planetary motion. Kepler was
devoted, throughout his life, to ﬁnding such regularities. In fact, he published
dozens of such “laws” reﬂecting regularities he had discovered, or thought he had
discovered. Today we largely ignore all but three of these laws (the two explained
above, plus a third law relating a planet’s distance from the sun and time of orbit),
but to Kepler, this was a large part of what his work was about – discovering the
regularities inherent in the universe, and thereby reading the mind of God.
Science works in mysterious ways. Kepler got it right, in that after 2,000 years
of work on the problem of constructing a completely accurate astronomical
system, he was the ﬁrst to arrive at the correct picture of elliptical orbits and
varying speeds. He was an unusual individual. But his approach, much of which
(such as that described above) strikes us as quirky, was part of who he was. And
it is unlikely that Kepler could have accomplished what he did without the
quirkiness.

Concluding Remarks
After discussing the Copernican system in Chapter 14, we took a moment to
consider how that system was received. And we saw that, generally speaking,
almost all astronomers soon became acquainted with the Copernican system, and
that quite a number used the system, with most taking an instrumentalist attitude
toward it. Before closing this chapter, a few observations on the reception of
Kepler’s system are in order.
The reception of Kepler’s system is somewhat less straightforward to discuss
than was the reception of Copernicus’ system. Partly this is due to the fact that a
number of astronomers attempted to replicate Kepler’s success, but using perfect
circles and uniform motion. That is, these astronomers recognized Kepler’s
accomplishment in producing a system that would account for the empirical
data far better than any existing system, but wrongly believed they could use
Kepler’s work to gain new insight into how to modify existing systems of perfect
circles and uniform motion, and thereby achieve the same level of accuracy as
Kepler’s system. In a sense, then, such astronomers were acknowledging Kepler’s
success, while not fully accepting his methods.
A second complicating factor concerns the timing of Kepler’s work. Kepler
published his system (at least, his work with the motion of Mars) in 1609.
Astronomical issues were generally issues for the specialists – generally, mathe­
matically trained astronomers – and not so much issues for public debate. The
very next year, however, Galileo published his discoveries with the telescope.
Galileo’s discoveries are discussed in more detail in the next chapter, but at this
point, sufﬁce it to say that his discoveries were easily accessible to a much wider
audience. Moreover, they were very exciting discoveries, and somewhat

16 Kepler’s System

overshadowed Kepler’s work. Certainly, Galileo’s work gained a wider audience
than did Kepler’s.
One last complicating issue is worth mentioning. Shortly after Galileo pub­
lished his discoveries with the telescope, the Catholic church took a formal stand
against the sun-centered view, and restricted the sorts of discussions and writings
allowed on the subject. Kepler’s 1609 publication mentioned immediately above,
concerning the motion of Mars, as well as some of his later writings, were placed
on the Index of forbidden books (essentially a list of publications that Catholics
were forbidden to read). Given such developments, some who had planned to
write on the Earth-centered versus sun-centered debate decided to withhold
publishing anything on the subject. As a result, Kepler was publishing his most
important discoveries at a time when there was less open debate and discussion
concerning the alternative systems.
So although it is more difﬁcult to get a clear sense of the reception of Kepler’s
views, it is clear that eventually, the advantages of Kepler’s system – its simplicity
together with the fact that it handled the empirical data far better – coupled with
Galileo’s new evidence from the telescope supporting a sun-centered over an
Earth-centered approach, became widely recognized. In addition, toward the end
of his life, in the late 1620s, Kepler produced a set of astronomical tables, based on
his system, that were far superior to any produced using any competing system.
As a result, by the mid-1600s it was clear to all who followed these issues that the
planets, including the Earth, did indeed move in elliptical orbits, at varying speeds,
around the sun. The philosophical/conceptual “facts” of uniform, perfectly
circular motion were, by the mid-1600s, ﬁnally recognized not to be facts at all.

137

138

17
Galileo and the Evidence from the Telescope
Another central player in the transition from an Earth-centered view to a suncentered view was Galileo (1564–1642). Galileo contributed in important ways to
astronomy, physics, and mathematics, but it is his work affecting astronomy that
most concerns us here. The main goals of this chapter will be to understand the
new data available from the telescope, to see how that data impacts the debate
between advocates of the various astronomical systems, and to explore the
reception of Galileo’s discoveries.
As we will see, Galileo’s work with the telescope provided, for the ﬁrst time, new
empirical data relevant to the Earth-centered versus sun-centered debate. How­
ever, we will also see that the new evidence did not, by itself, settle the issue.
Galileo thought the new evidence supported the sun-centered view, but others,
equally familiar with the evidence, did not. As usual, we will begin with some
background material.

Background Information
Galileo and the Catholic church
The telescope was invented just before 1600, and Galileo began using it for
astronomical observations in 1609. Galileo was one of the ﬁrst to use the telescope
for astronomical observations, and in doing so he discovered interesting new data
that very much inﬂuenced the debate between advocates of the Earth-centered
and sun-centered systems. He published his ﬁrst set of ﬁndings in 1610, and
published additional ﬁndings over the next several years.
The new data, and debates that arose largely because of that data, would
eventually involve Galileo in a well-known dispute with the Catholic church.
Given this, a few words on the religious situation during Galileo’s time are in
order.
Although we have not discussed this at any length, it will come as no surprise
that the church preferred the Earth-centered view. Part of the reason for this (but
not the only reason) concerns various passages in the Christian scriptures that
suggest the Earth is stationary and that the sun moves around the Earth. Thus, the

Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

17 Galileo and the Evidence from the Telescope

dispute between Galileo and the church would necessarily involve scriptural
interpretation.
Also worth noting is that the Catholic church, by and large, had a history of
being reasonably tolerant of new scientiﬁc views. For example, for the most part
the church was not opposed to the Copernican system. Of course, up until the
new evidence from the telescope, the Copernican system was generally taken with
an instrumentalist attitude, and as such was not contrary to scripture. But the
point is that the church did not generally oppose new scientiﬁc views, and was
generally willing to reinterpret scripture when required by new discoveries.
This was, though, a quite touchy time for the Catholic church. The Protestant
reformation had begun the previous century, and the church was actively engaged
in trying to suppress the spread of what it considered heretical views. So Galileo’s
work with the telescope came at a time when the church was not as tolerant as it
might have otherwise been.
It is worth mentioning that Galileo himself was a devout Catholic. He certainly
had no desire to undermine the church, nor would he take lightly the eventual
concerns that some of his views might be heretical. As we will see below, Galileo
had genuine differences of opinion involving the interpretation of scripture, and
these differences would play a role in his dealings with the church.
A note on the nature of the evidence from the telescope
With respect to the debate between advocates of Earth-centered and suncentered systems, it is important to keep in mind that there is no data available
from naked-eye observations that can settle the debate. In fact, as emphasized all
along, naked-eye observations strongly support an Earth-centered view.
Notably, even with the telescope there is no way to tell directly whether an
Earth-centered or sun-centered view is correct. I want to take a moment to
discuss this, because I think it is a point that is often misunderstood, and because
appreciating this point will help one get a better sense of the nature of the
evidence provided by the telescope.
Suppose we leave Galileo for a moment, and jump ahead 400 years to the
present time. Even today, with all the technological advances of the past 400 years,
we still have no technology that directly shows whether the Earth moves around
the sun, or whether the sun moves around the Earth. Our most direct evidence
that the Earth moves about the sun is the stellar parallax that was ﬁnally
documented for the ﬁrst time in the 1800s. But the evidence from stellar parallax
is not direct observational evidence, in the sense we discussed in Chapter 3.
Not even photographs from space directly settle the issue of whether the Earth
moves around the sun. To see this, suppose we had a photograph, such as
Figure 17.1 showing the sun, Mercury, Venus, and the Earth. Incidentally, we have
no such photograph. Such a photograph would have to be taken from a vantage
point above or below the axis of the Earth, but as a matter of fact, we do not send
spacecraft in that direction. The interesting features of our solar system – the
planets, asteroids, and so on – tend to lie more or less on a plane that cuts roughly
through the equator of the Earth. So our spacecraft are generally sent out along
that plane, and not in the direction of the axis of the Earth. But the point is that,

139

140

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Figure 17.1 “Photograph” of sun and
planets.

even if we did have such a photograph, it would not show whether the Earth or the
sun is the center of our solar system.
To see this, notice that the “photograph” in Figure 17.1 is equally compatible
with either an Earth-centered or a sun-centered system. That is, the photograph is
compatible with the sun-centered view illustrated in Figure 17.2. But the photo­
graph is equally compatible with the Earth-centered view illustrated by
Figure 17.3.
In short, even if we could take such photographs of our solar system, they
would not show whether the Earth or the sun was the center. Even if we took, say,
long-running videos, so as to plot the position of the sun and the planets over the
course of time, such videos would show only the relative motions of the sun and
the planets. That is, such videos would show only the way in which the sun and the
planets move relative to one another. But the relative motions of the sun and the
planets on an Earth-centered Tychonic system are exactly the same as the relative
motions of the sun and the planets on a sun-centered system. In other words, even
if we had such videos, they would turn out to be compatible with an Earthcentered Tychonic system. (I should note that such a video would not be
compatible with the original Tychonic system, with its epicycles, perfect circles,
and uniform motion, but rather with a modiﬁed and “modernized” Tychonic
system. Such a modiﬁed Tychonic system is similar to what is shown in
Figure 15.1, but incorporates elliptical orbits with planets moving at varying
speeds. It is this modiﬁed Tychonic system that is preferred by the modern-day
advocates of an Earth-centered system mentioned at the end of Chapter 15.)
I am going on at some length on this issue, but it illustrates a general, and
important, point: the evidence we gain from our technology is rarely as direct as it

Figure 17.2 Sun-centered interpretation of “photograph.”

17 Galileo and the Evidence from the Telescope

Figure 17.3 Earth-centered interpretation of “photograph.”

is often assumed to be. This is an important point to keep in mind as we consider
Galileo’s evidence from the telescope.
So Galileo’s evidence from the telescope, although fascinating and important,
does not directly settle the debate between advocates of the sun-centered and
Earth-centered systems. But the evidence does provide a range of indirect
evidence that certainly impacts the debate. Let’s now move on to consider
Galileo’s evidence.

Galileo’s Evidence from the Telescope
Galileo reported a variety of new observations gathered from his use of the
telescope. Some of this data raised only relatively minor issues for Earth-centered
views, whereas other data raised more substantial issues. In each case, we will
discuss not only what Galileo reported seeing, but also how the new data
inﬂuences the issue of a sun-centered versus an Earth-centered view.
Mountains on the moon
Galileo was one of the ﬁrst to use the telescope to observe some of the features of
the moon’s surface, including mountains, plains, and what we now know to be
craters. To some extent these can be seen with the naked eye, and others before
Galileo had even speculated that there were mountains on the moon. But only
with the telescope can one make out these features in any detail.
The fact that the moon has features such as mountains does not in any way
directly show that the Earth moves around the sun. Rather, this fact ﬁgures into
the debate because it undermines the general Aristotelian picture of the universe.
Recall that on the Aristotelian worldview, the objects in the heavens were
composed only of ether, and this fact ﬁgured into the general Aristotelian
explanation of the movements of the heavenly bodies. So the fact that the
moon appears to be a large rocky body, similar in appearance in many ways
to the Earth, pretty clearly shows that this Aristotelian belief cannot be correct.

141

142

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

It is worth noting that this evidence, by itself, would never have been sufﬁcient
to seriously undermine the Aristotelian worldview. While it is true that the
Aristotelian worldview included the belief that heavenly bodies were composed of
ether, that particular belief – that part of the jigsaw puzzle – could have been
modiﬁed without seriously changing the overall set of beliefs. For example, the
moon is on the border of the sublunar and superlunar regions, so it would not be
unreasonable to envision the moon containing both sublunar and superlunar
elements. To put it another way, the Aristotelian beliefs about the moon are not
core beliefs. But without question, the existence of features such as mountains on
the moon shows that the Aristotelian worldview could not remain unchanged in
the face of the new evidence from the telescope.
So the existence of mountains on the moon largely factored into the debate by
showing there were some cracks in the Aristotelian worldview. But in another
important way, this data helped make the sun-centered view more plausible.
Recall the argument for a stationary Earth (discussed in Chapter 10) that was
based on the idea that nothing could keep the Earth in motion. Again, the Earth is
a large, rocky body, and, much like the large boulder in my front yard, it will
remain stationary unless something continually moves it. The argument seems
compelling enough. But with the telescope we can now see that the moon appears
to be a large rocky body, and it clearly is in continual motion. So if the large rocky
moon can be in continual motion about the Earth, perhaps the large rocky Earth
could be in continual motion about the sun.
Sunspots
Galileo was also one of the ﬁrst to use the telescope to observe sunspots, that is,
dark regions that appear when looking at the sun. One cannot observe the sun
directly through a telescope, as this would make short work of one’s retina, but the
telescopic image of the sun can be observed by projecting it on a piece of paper.
Galileo used this method to observe sunspots. Using his observations, Galileo was
able to argue convincingly that such spots must be regions on the sun itself, rather
than, for example, being the images of small planets moving in front of the sun.
As with the mountains on the moon, this data also does not provide any
substantial reason to think the sun-centered view is correct. But unlike the moon,
which was on the border of the sublunar and superlunar regions, the sun is clearly
well within the superlunar region. So if sunspots are on the sun, as Galileo
convincingly argued, then the superlunar region cannot be the region of
unchanging perfection it was believed to be on the Aristotelian worldview. So
as with the mountains on the moon, this data proves to be another crack in the
Aristotelian worldview.
The rings, or “ears,” of Saturn
Galileo’s evidence concerning Saturn had a similar consequence to that of the
evidence concerning the moon and sun. Galileo was the ﬁrst to observe that, at
times, Saturn has bulges on the side, appearing to be something like handles or
ears. We now know that Galileo was observing the rings of Saturn, although the

17 Galileo and the Evidence from the Telescope

resolving power of his telescope was not sufﬁcient to see the rings as anything but
bulges on the sides of Saturn. (It would be about another half-century before the
bulges were correctly hypothesized to be a ring structure around Saturn.)
Once again, this data provides another small crack in the Aristotelian worldview. Recall that the heavenly bodies were composed of ether, which naturally has
a perfectly spherical shape. The planets, then, since they are composed of ether,
must be perfectly spherical. Galileo’s observations showed that Saturn, along with
the moon and the sun, did not ﬁt the expectations of the Aristotelian worldview.
The moons of Jupiter
Of all the phenomena capable of being viewed with Galileo’s telescope, the moons
of Jupiter were probably the most enjoyable to observe. Through a telescope,
Galileo was able to observe four small points of light, which vary their position
around Jupiter over time, and which Galileo correctly reasoned were moons
orbiting Jupiter. Even today, the moons of Jupiter are perhaps the most pleasant
sight available through a small telescope (even as enjoyable to observe as the rings
of Saturn).
In a wise career move, Galileo named the moons of Jupiter the “Medicean
Stars,” in honor of the Medici family. The Medicis were one of the most powerful
families of Italy, and by ﬂattering them, Galileo hoped to become a member of the
Medicean court. He would soon be successful, shortly afterward being named the
chief mathematician and philosopher (“philosopher” more in the sense of what we
would call a scientist) of the Medicean court.
Galileo spent a great deal of time carefully observing and plotting the positions
of the moons, and was able to establish that they were indeed bodies moving about
Jupiter. This too was evidence that did not ﬁt easily into the Aristotelian
worldview. Recall that, on the Aristotelian worldview, and in particular on the
Ptolemaic system, the Earth is the single center of all rotation in the universe. All
heavenly bodies – the moon, sun, stars, and planets – move in circles about the
center of the universe, that being the center of the Earth. And this in turn was tied
to the nature of the element ether, that is, the essential nature of ether was to
move in perfect circles around the center of the universe. But now there are
heavenly bodies – the moons of Jupiter – that should be composed of ether but
that are not moving about the center of the universe. In short, Galileo’s discovery
of bodies orbiting Jupiter shows conclusively that, contrary to the Aristotelian
belief, there is not only one single center of rotation in the universe. And it
likewise showed there is something not quite right with the Aristotelian view on
the nature of ether.
It is also worth noting a related implication of the moons of Jupiter. Supporters
of the Earth-centered view had argued that, on a sun-centered view, the
movement of the moon was somewhat awkward. That is, it is somewhat inelegant
to have the moon moving around the Earth, and then have the Earth moving
around the sun. In contrast, this argument went, the Earth-centered view was
more elegant – it had one single, simple center of rotation about which all the
heavenly bodies moved. But Galileo’s discovery of the moons of Jupiter puts this
argument to rest, since even the advocates of the Earth-centered view would now

143

144

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

have to accept that at least one body – Jupiter – has bodies moving about it while
it itself moves.
The phases of Venus
The phases of Venus provide some of the most dramatic evidence relevant to the
debate. With the naked eye, one cannot observe the fact that Venus, like our
moon, goes through a full range of phases. But with a telescope, the phases of
Venus are easily observable, and Galileo was the ﬁrst to discover them. Moreover,
not only does Venus go through a full range of phases, but it differs in size
depending on what phase it is in. Figure 17.4 illustrates Venus as it appears in its
full, three-quarter, half, quarter, and crescent phases. To understand the impor­
tance of this data, we need to understand why Venus appears in different phases at
different times. Since the explanation will be essentially the same as the explan­
ation for why the moon goes through phases, let us ﬁrst discuss the moon, and
then turn to Venus.
The phases of the moon are a consequence of the relative positions of the sun,
moon, and Earth. At any given time, one half of the moon will be illuminated by
the sun, and the other half will be dark. When the moon and Earth are positioned
such that we see the full illuminated side, then we have a full moon. When we see
only half the illuminated surface, we have a half-moon, and when we see only a
small portion of the illuminated half, then we have a crescent moon. Figure 17.5
may help. The various moons labeled ¼, ¾, and so on, represent the various
positions, relative to the Earth and the sun, that the moon occupies during its
approximately 27-day orbit around the Earth. Incidentally, the ﬁgure is not close
to being drawn to scale. For example, from the ﬁgure one might get the
impression that the moon is often in the Earth’s shadow, but that is an artifact
of having to condense the ﬁgure so it will ﬁt on a page, and of having to put the
ﬁgure on a two-dimensional sheet of paper. In fact, because the sun is large
enough, and the moon and Earth far enough apart, and the orbit of the moon is
“tilted,” the moon is only occasionally in the shadow of the Earth (and this is why
lunar eclipses occur relatively rarely, rather than occurring on every revolution of
the moon about the Earth).
When the moon is at the position labeled F, with the illuminated half facing the
Earth, we will see a full moon. When the moon is at the point labeled ¾, we see a

Figure 17.4 Phases of Venus.

17 Galileo and the Evidence from the Telescope

Figure 17.5 Phases of the moon.

three-quarter moon, and so on for the half-moon, quarter (or crescent) moon, and
for the new moon, where we see no moon in the night sky (the position labeled N).
If Venus goes through a range of phases, as Galileo discovered it does, then like
the moon, the phases must be the result of the relative positions of the sun, Earth,
and Venus. Importantly, a sun-centered system (either that of Copernicus or that
of Kepler) leads to a very different prediction concerning the phases of Venus than
does the Ptolemaic system. In particular, on a sun-centered view we would expect
Venus to go through a full range of phases. In contrast, if the Ptolemaic system is
correct, then Venus should at most be seen as a crescent, but never in a half, threequarter, or full phase.
These differing predictions are best illustrated through diagrams. Let’s ﬁrst
consider the Ptolemaic picture of the Earth, the sun, and Venus, shown in
Figure 17.6. Here is where a key empirical fact, discussed at the end of
Chapter 11, comes into play. Recall that, as a matter of fact, Venus never appears
far from the sun. That is, wherever the sun is in the sky, Venus will never be far
from it. Again, that is why Venus can only be seen either just after sunset (at
certain times of the year), or just before sunrise (at other times of the year). The
remainder of the day and night Venus cannot be seen, either because (at night) it
is below the horizon along with the sun, or else it is in the daytime sky near the
sun, and the light from the sun prevents us from seeing it.
On the Ptolemaic system, there is one and only one way to explain this fact, and
that is to have the sun and Venus complete a revolution about the Earth in the
same amount of time (or more precisely, the sun and Venus’ epicycle complete a
revolution in the same amount of time). In other words, the Earth, the sun, and
the center of the epicycle on which Venus revolves must always be arranged in a
line, as they are shown in Figure 17.6.
But notice this entails that the illuminated half of Venus is always facing away
from the Earth. And so, like the moon when its illuminated half is facing away
from the Earth, Venus will appear (at most) as a crescent. In other words, on the

145

146

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Figure 17.6 Sun, Venus, and Earth on the Ptolemaic
system.

Ptolemaic system, we could at most see only a small portion of the illuminated
half of Venus. We could never see a full Venus, or a three-quarter Venus, or a halfVenus. All these would require conﬁgurations that are impossible on the
Ptolemaic system.
Galileo’s discovery of the phases of Venus, then, provides straightforward
disconﬁrming evidence for the Ptolemaic system. In contrast, as explained below,
on a sun-centered view one would expect Venus to go through a full range of
phases, and so the phases of Venus provide conﬁrming evidence for the suncentered view.
Before we consider the explanation for how a sun-centered view accounts for
the phases of Venus, note ﬁrst that, on a sun-centered view, the empirical fact that
Venus always appears in the sky close to the sun is explained by the fact that
Venus is an inner planet. That is, Venus is closer to the sun than is the Earth. In
Figure 17.7, note that from the Earth, no matter where Venus is in its orbit, it can
never appear to be very far away from the sun. Moreover, since on a sun-centered
view Venus completes a revolution around the sun in a shorter time than does the
Earth (225 days compared to the Earth’s 365), Venus will sometimes be on the far
side of the sun from us, and thus appear as a full Venus, sometimes to the side of
the sun and so appear as a half-Venus, sometimes between us and the sun and so
appear not at all or as a crescent, and so on. In short, on a sun-centered view we
would expect Venus to go through a full range of phases, and so Galileo’s
discovery provides conﬁrming evidence for the sun-centered view.
Not only does the sun-centered view correctly predict that Venus should go
through a full range of phases, but in addition, it quite naturally accounts for the
correlation between the phases of Venus and the size Venus appears to be.

17 Galileo and the Evidence from the Telescope

Figure 17.7 Sun, Venus, and Earth on a sun-centered system.

Notice in Figure 17.4 that Venus appears smallest when it is in its full phase, and
largest when it is in its crescent phase. This is exactly what we would expect from a
sun-centered view. Since Venus can only be in a full (or nearly full) phase when it
is on the far side of the sun, which will be when Venus is furthest from the Earth,
we would expect it to then be at its smallest. Likewise, Venus can only be in its
crescent phase when it is between the Earth and the sun, at its nearest point to the
Earth, and thus it should appear largest during its crescent phase.
Although the phases of Venus provide important disconﬁrming evidence
against the Ptolemaic system, it is crucial to note that the phases of Venus do
not sufﬁce to settle the sun-centered versus Earth-centered issue. Recall again the
Tychonic system, described in Chapter 15. Again, the Tychonic system is an
Earth-centered system, where the moon and the sun revolve about the Earth, but
in which the planets revolve about the sun. On the Tychonic system, one would
also expect Venus to show a full range of phases, and to be smallest when in its full
phase and largest when in its crescent phase. Likewise, one could modify the
Ptolemaic system, having Venus (and presumably Mercury as well) move about
the sun while keeping all other motion around the Earth. Such a modiﬁed
Ptolemaic system would likewise be compatible with the phases of Venus. In
short, to the extent that the evidence from the phases of Venus provides
conﬁrming evidence for a sun-centered system, that evidence also provides
conﬁrming evidence for an Earth-centered system such as the Tychonic system,
or the modiﬁed Ptolemaic system just described. So although the phases of Venus

147

148

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

provide evidence against the original Ptolemaic system, they do not at all settle the
issue between a sun-centered approach and an Earth-centered approach.
As a brief point, note how this example nicely illustrates the underdetermi­
nation of theories discussed in Chapter 5. That is, even new evidence as dramatic
as the discovery of the phases of Venus turns out to be perfectly compatible with
both a sun-centered approach (including both Copernicus’ and Kepler’s theories)
and an Earth-centered approach (including the Tychonic system as well as a
modiﬁed sort of Ptolemaic system described above). This is typical in science –
new evidence, even dramatic new evidence, is typically compatible with two or
more competing theories. In other words, the available evidence usually does not
uniquely determine a particular theory as being correct.
Finally, it is worth noting that, although the phases of Venus do not settle the
issue, they nonetheless require that substantial changes be made. That is, the
Ptolemaic system had been the default system for the past 1,500 years, and now
that system had to be replaced. So whether one switches allegiance to a suncentered view, or to the Tychonic system, or to a modiﬁed Ptolemaic system, one
is required to make substantial changes in one’s beliefs about the structure of the
universe.
The stars
One ﬁnal discovery is worth discussing, even if only brieﬂy. With the telescope,
Galileo discovered there were countless more stars than those visible with the
naked eye. This at least suggests the possibility that the universe is much larger
than previously suspected, and perhaps that the universe is even inﬁnite, with an
inﬁnite number of stars. Galileo himself did not advocate this view, but, in the
decades to follow, the idea of a huge, perhaps inﬁnite universe took hold, and
Galileo’s discovery of the vastly greater number of stars would ﬁt into this new
view of the universe.

The Reception of Galileo’s Discoveries
Galileo’s discoveries with the telescope were understandably viewed as exciting
new discoveries, and they made Galileo one of the best-known scientists of the
time. He published most of his discoveries with the telescope between 1610 and
1613, and in these publications and other writings we can see that Galileo is now
thinking that the sun-centered view must be the correct model of the universe.
Recall that, by this time, the sun-centered Copernican system had been used and
taught for about 70 years, but that during this time the Copernican system was
generally taken with an instrumentalist attitude. Galileo, now, is suggesting a
realist attitude toward the sun-centered view.
The church (that is, the Catholic church, which had strong inﬂuence in the
Catholic areas of Europe) had no problems with the sun-centered Copernican
system, so long as that system was taken with an instrumentalist attitude. But it
began to have substantial problems with the idea that the sun-centered view
might really be the way the universe is constructed.

17 Galileo and the Evidence from the Telescope

Galileo traveled to Rome in late 1615, to try to prevent the sun-centered view
from being condemned by the church. By this time Galileo realized the evidence
from the telescope alone would not be sufﬁcient to convince those on the other
side of the debate, and he developed another argument, based on the tides, to
support the sun-centered view. This new argument was presented in a work he
circulated in 1615. Incidentally, Galileo’s account of the tides turned out to be
wrong – he was essentially arguing that the oceans sloshed around due to the
Earth’s movement, much as water on the deck of a boat will slosh around due to
the boat’s movement.
In spite of Galileo’s efforts, in early 1616 the church made a formal judgment
against the sun-centered view. More speciﬁcally, the view that the sun was
stationary at the center of the universe was judged to be “foolish and absurd in
philosophy and formally heretical” (trans. by Mayer 2012, pp. 91–2). What this
means is that, as a scientiﬁc/empirical matter the view is false (“foolish and
absurd in philosophy”), and as a religious matter it is heretical because it
directly contradicts scripture. The view that the Earth moves in any way, for
example on its axis or about the sun, was likewise judged to be foolish and
absurd, and as a religious matter was judged to be erroneous. (“Erroneous” in
this context means that while it does not itself directly contradict scripture, it
logically entails a view – namely that the sun is stationary – that does directly
contradict scripture.)
Having been judged to be heretical, believing in or defending the sun-centered
view was prohibited. However, the teaching of the sun-centered view was not
prohibited outright. Rather, what was prohibited was teaching, believing, or
advocating the reality of the sun-centered view. The sun-centered view could
still be written about and taught as a “hypothesis” – that is, it could be treated with
what we would term an instrumentalist attitude. Copernicus’ own book on the
subject, published back in 1543, could still be taught, but only after corrections
were made so as to edit out the passages where Copernicus suggests the reality of
the sun-centered view.
Given that Galileo was by this point taking a realist attitude toward the suncentered view, and openly advocating that realist attitude, the church’s proceed­
ings could have speciﬁcally targeted him. But the church opted not to investigate
Galileo himself, and neither he nor any of his writings were mentioned in the
church’s formal judgment against the sun-centered view. However, Galileo was
summoned to a private meeting with Cardinal Bellarmine, one of the leading
church ﬁgures involved in these proceedings. At that meeting, Galileo was
instructed clearly and in no uncertain terms that he was not to teach or defend
the sun-centered view. But at bottom, although the judgment in 1616 was bad
news for Galileo, it could have been worse.
Falsiﬁability issues
What can we say about the church’s judgment against the reality of the suncentered system and, given the relevance of Galileo’s evidence from the telescope,
what can we say about the church’s attitude toward that evidence? Was this a case
of refusing even to consider such evidence? Was the church unwilling to accept

149

150

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

any evidence against their view, no matter how compelling that evidence was, so
that they were treating the Earth-centered view as unfalsiﬁable?
If we view the situation as it appears in the years after the church’s 1616
judgment, the answer to this question is almost certainly “yes.” That is, once the
church had declared the sun-centered view to be false and heretical, and had
prohibited teaching, advocating, or believing in the reality of the sun-centered
system, it is difﬁcult to view the church’s attitude as other than unfalsiﬁable. But
the question is more interesting if we look at whether, prior to that judgment, the
church was taking an unfalsiﬁable attitude. As is often the case, the question turns
out to be more complex than it might at ﬁrst appear. As noted, Bellarmine was
one of the leading church ﬁgures involved in these matters. To make the
discussion more concrete, let’s focus on Bellarmine’s views prior to the 1616
judgment, and contrast them with Galileo’s.
First, there was no issue about accepting Galileo’s evidence from the telescope.
Bellarmine was a competent astronomer, and he and other church astronomers,
including the notable mathematician and astronomer Christopher Clavius,
replicated Galileo’s observations and certiﬁed them as accurate. The church
astronomers not only veriﬁed Galileo’s discoveries, but had high words of praise
for them. In addition, there was general agreement that the evidence from the
telescope was problematic for the Earth-centered view, especially for the Ptole­
maic system (though as emphasized earlier, the Earth-centered Tychonic system
was compatible with the evidence from the telescope).
Nor was there any issue about accepting the authority of scripture. Both Galileo
and Bellarmine agreed that scripture is infallible, that is, everything said in the
Christian bible is accurate. And both agreed that some passages from scripture
suggested that the Earth is stationary at the center of the universe.
The main issue between Galileo and Bellarmine was how to weigh the evidence,
how to understand what the scriptural evidence suggests versus what the evidence
from the telescope suggests. Bellarmine’s views are best summarized in a
relatively short piece he wrote and distributed in 1615, generally referred to as
the Letter to Foscarini. Galileo’s views are most clearly articulated in his 1613
Letter to Castelli, and then more thoroughly and carefully presented in portions of
a rather longer piece, circulated in 1615, generally referred to as the Letter to the
Grand Duchess Christina. (Christina, by the way, was a prominent member of the
Medici family, and it was important that Galileo remain in good standing with the
family by trying to reassure her and others that his views were not contrary to
scripture or Catholic teaching.)
In these writings, Galileo makes it clear that he believes every word of the bible is
correct. But, he says, the bible was written for everyone, including people who lived
at far earlier, less advanced times, and people who had little or no education. As a
result, the bible was written in such a way that its true meaning is often difﬁcult to
determine. So, Galileo argues, if we are dealing with empirical/scientiﬁc matters for
which we can gather empirical/scientiﬁc evidence, we should weigh the empirical
evidence much more heavily then scriptural-based evidence. And we should never
rely on the bible to make a ﬁnal judgment about such empirical matters.
Moreover, Galileo argues, empirical matters such as whether the sun moves
around the Earth or the Earth moves around the sun are not matters relevant to

17 Galileo and the Evidence from the Telescope

salvation. That is, whatever you believe about this matter, your belief will not
affect your salvation or lack of salvation. This, then, provides another reason not
to rely on scriptural evidence in deciding what the most reasonable empirical
beliefs are.
As an additional point, Galileo argues that it would be very bad for the church if
it were to make a ﬁnal pronouncement on an empirical matter, based on
scriptural passages, only to have that pronouncement later be shown by empirical
evidence to be deﬁnitely wrong. So as a general policy, Galileo is arguing that the
church ought not to make any judgments about empirical matters based on
scriptural evidence.
Bellarmine, in his Letter to Foscarini, makes clear his disagreement with
Galileo. First, Bellarmine notes, the scriptural passages suggesting the Earth is
stationary with the sun moving around it do not seem to be complicated passages.
Nor has there been, Bellarmine notes, any disagreement among the church
experts on how to interpret these passages. All the relevant church authorities
– those trained in theology and scriptural interpretation – have agreed that the
relevant scriptural passages say, quite clearly, that the sun moves about the Earth.
So contrary to what Galileo suggests, this does not seem to be a situation involving
difﬁcult scriptural interpretation.
Moreover, contrary to Galileo’s views, Bellarmine states that whether one
believes the sun moves around the Earth or the Earth moves around the sun is
relevant to salvation. The bible says the sun moves around the Earth, and so one
cannot reject this belief without rejecting the correctness of these passages. To
reject the correctness of these biblical passages would be to reject something that
God has spoken. And this, on Bellarmine’s view, makes whether one believes in an
Earth-centered or sun-centered view relevant to salvation.
Finally, it is worth noting that in the letter, Bellarmine is clear that if it could be
demonstrated that the Earth moves around the sun, then the church would have
to accept that demonstration. But at the same time (presumably for the scriptural
reasons outlined above, coupled with the empirical evidence against a moving
Earth), Bellarmine indicates that he thinks such a demonstration would not and
could not be forthcoming. Nonetheless, Bellarmine does at least consider the
possibility of such a demonstration, and notes that, should such a demonstration
be made, church leaders would need to carefully consider how it was they had so
badly misunderstood the scriptures on this point.
Note that Galileo and Bellarmine agree on a number of issues. Both accept the
data from the telescope, and both accept the authority of scripture. Both agree
that scripture suggests the sun moves about the Earth, and both agree that the
data from the telescope suggests otherwise.
However, Galileo and Bellarmine differ on how to weigh various pieces of
evidence. Galileo’s view is that when dealing with matters involving salvation,
scriptural evidence trumps. But on other matters, those not involving salvation,
empirical evidence should be given the greater weight and, if need be, scriptures
should be reinterpreted to ﬁt the empirical evidence. And since, on Galileo’s view,
whether the Earth or sun is the center of the universe is not a matter relevant to
salvation, this is a situation where the evidence from the telescope should trump
the evidence from scripture.

151

152

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

In contrast, Bellarmine’s view is that, since the bible speaks of these matters,
whether one accepts an Earth-centered or a sun-centered view is relevant to
salvation. And since it is unlikely we are misunderstanding the scriptural passages
that speak of a stationary Earth and moving sun, in this dispute the scriptural
evidence trumps the evidence from the telescope. In short, I think it is fair to say
that, if asked, Bellarmine would have agreed that he was willing to give up the
Earth-centered view if provided with sufﬁcient evidence. But it is clear that
Bellarmine has a different notion than Galileo on which evidence counts the most,
and given the evidence Bellarmine favors, he thinks it extremely unlikely, perhaps
impossible, that such evidence will ever be forthcoming.
This situation is exactly what we discussed earlier, when we ﬁrst explored the
issue of falsiﬁability back in Chapter 7. As we saw then, issues involving
falsiﬁability often come down to the issue of what evidence is considered to
weigh most heavily. And this in turn is usually a matter of one’s overall view.
Bellarmine was quite respectful of scientiﬁc discoveries, but he was ﬁrst and
foremost a church leader, and for him scriptural evidence trumps scientiﬁc
evidence. Galileo, on the other hand, was very respectful of religious matters, but
he was ﬁrst and foremost a scientist, and for him evidence gathered from new
scientiﬁc discoveries trumps religious evidence.
So where does this leave us with respect to the question of whether Bellarmine
was treating the Earth-centered view as unfalsiﬁable? I think that if Bellarmine
were advocating these views today, following 400 years of extraordinarily suc­
cessful and productive science based on respect for empirical evidence, then his
attitude would be as unreasonable and unfalsiﬁable as Steve’s views (discussed in
Chapter 7). But in the context of the early 1600s, there were no good reasons to
think that the sort of empirically based approach Galileo was advocating would be
as successful as it has been. So I think the only fair answer is that there simply is
not a clear yes or no response to the question of whether during this time
Bellarmine was treating the Earth-centered view as unfalsiﬁable. As we investigate
these sorts of cases, we ﬁnd they are far more complex than they at ﬁrst appear.
And this complexity is, I think, much of what makes the history and philosophy of
science so interesting.

Concluding Remarks
As noted above, Galileo came through the church’s 1616 judgment against the
reality of the sun-centered view relatively unscathed. Some years later he was less
fortunate. In early 1632 Galileo published Dialogues Concerning the Two Chief
World Systems, which was a substantial book discussing the arguments for and
against the Earth-centered and sun-centered systems. Recall that, in general,
merely discussing the sun-centered system was not prohibited; only advocating
the reality of it was.
This book was not well received by the church, and the view of the church was
that it crossed the line between discussion of the sun-centered view, and advocacy
of that view. This episode, including the eventual trial of Galileo, is quite complex,
and we can only touch upon a few of the complicating factors. The book is written

17 Galileo and the Evidence from the Telescope

as a dialogue, and so technically Galileo could claim that it was his characters in
the dialogue, rather than he himself, that were advocating various positions. But
this convinced no one. The book is quite clearly, and quite strongly, advocating
the reality of the sun-centered view. And given the meeting in 1616 with
Bellarmine mentioned earlier (including written documentation of the meeting),
in which he was told he could not believe or advocate the sun-centered view, there
is not much question that Galileo did cross the line. However, the book had gone
through the church’s review process and been approved for publication, but even
this review involved a number of complicating factors (for example, Galileo was
accused of being deceitful by not informing the reviewers of the 1616 meeting
with Bellarmine). Also relevant is the fact that, over the years, Galileo had
managed to offend a number of inﬂuential people. In his writing, he could at
times be extremely sarcastic and unﬂattering toward various individuals, and he
managed to accumulate a number of individuals, some powerful, who disliked
him. Moreover, Galileo seemed at times to be rather politically tone-deaf. Then as
now, there are always various political realities that need to be recognized. Today,
for example, it would not be politically wise to put forth a grant request to, say, the
National Science Foundation, and begin the request by insulting the panel that
will judge the request. For Galileo, it would not have been politically wise, say, to
publish a book with sections that offend the Pope. Yet his 1632 book did seem to
offend the Pope. At the very least, there were those who tried to convince the Pope
that he should be offended, and this surely did not help the situation.
The details of Galileo’s trial are complex and in some respects controversial,
but the eventual outcome was that his book was prohibited by the church, Galileo
was judged as suspected of heresy and sentenced to imprisonment, and he was
made to formally declare that the sun-centered view was false. He spent the
remainder of his life under house arrest, dying in 1642. He did, however, manage
to continue working while under house arrest, returning to some of his earlier
work on the mechanics of bodies in motion, and producing some important
writing on this subject.
Given the issues involving the church, many of Galileo’s contemporaries were
understandably hesitant to openly advocate the sun-centered view. But eventually
the cumulative effect of discoveries such as these – Kepler’s discovery that a
system using elliptical orbits and varying speeds could account for the data much
better than any alternative; Kepler’s publication in 1627 of astronomical tables, far
superior to any others, based on his system; and Galileo’s evidence from the
telescope – would convince most of those who paid attention to such matters that
the Earth and planets do indeed revolve about the sun, and do so in elliptical orbits
with varying speeds. This would in turn raise a host of problems for the existing
worldview. We turn next to these issues.

153

154

18
A Summary of Problems Facing the Aristotelian Worldview
Suppose we are living in the ﬁrst half of the 1600s, and that we are keeping up on
the new discoveries. We are familiar with Galileo’s evidence from the telescope,
and we recognize that it provides substantial problems for the traditional
Ptolemaic Earth-centered view. We are also familiar with Kepler’s vastly simpler
model of the universe, employing elliptical orbits with planets moving at varying
speeds at different points in their orbits, and we appreciate the fact that Kepler’s
system is much better at prediction and explanation. And we recognize the
superiority of the astronomical tables Kepler published in the late 1620s, which
were based on his new system. In general, suppose we have become convinced
that Kepler’s sun-centered view is correct (and it seems likely that most of those
who followed these developments similarly became convinced, at least by the
mid-1600s, of the correctness of Kepler’s view). In short, we are now convinced
that the Earth and other planets move about the sun in elliptical orbits at varying
speeds, and that the Earth revolves on its axis, completing a revolution once a day.
Such views would raise a variety of problems for the Aristotelian worldview, and
the main goal of this chapter is to summarize such problems.
It is worth noting that not everyone became convinced of the correctness of the
sun-centered approach. As we have noted previously, the Earth-centered
Tychonic system is compatible with all the evidence from the telescope. And
if one modiﬁes the original Tychonic system by incorporating Kepler’s elliptical
orbits and planets moving with varying speeds, the resulting system will be nearly
as simple as Kepler’s, and will have the same predictive and explanatory power. In
short, an Earth-centered view was still an option.
Nonetheless, it seems clear that by about the mid-1600s, the majority of those
keeping up on the new discoveries became convinced of the correctness of the suncentered view. And as noted, this in turn would raise a number of difﬁcult problems
for the Aristotelian worldview. We’ll turn now to a brief summary of those problems.

Problems for the Aristotelian Worldview
If the Earth is in motion, both revolving on its axis and revolving about the sun,
what keeps us on the Earth, and why do heavy objects fall downward? Recall that,
on the Aristotelian worldview, heavy objects had a natural tendency to move
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

18 Problems Facing the Aristotelian Worldview

toward the center of the universe, and that was what kept us on Earth and why
heavy objects fell. But this piece of the Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle cannot remain if
the Earth is not the center of the universe.
Moreover, what keeps the Earth in motion? Again, on the Aristotelian worldview, objects in motion tend to come to a halt, unless something keeps them in
motion. This belief coincides with our everyday experience, but this piece of the
jigsaw puzzle must also be wrong if the Earth is in motion.
In a similar vein, why, when we throw an object straight up, does it land back in
our hand? The standard belief on the Aristotelian worldview was that, if the Earth
is in motion, then we should move out from under a thrown object while that
object is in the air. So the behavior of thrown objects is another piece of the
Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle that no longer works.
And if the Earth rotates on its axis once a day, we should be moving at about
1,000 miles per hour due to this motion. And if the Earth is moving about the sun,
then it must be moving at incredible speeds in its orbit about the sun (we now
know this speed to be close to 70,000 miles per hour). But on the common-sense
view of the Aristotelian worldview, we would expect to notice the effects of such
dramatic motions. So why doesn’t it feel like we are in motion? Why isn’t there a
strong wind in our face, and why can’t we feel the usual vibrations and other
effects that we would expect to accompany such motion?
And what about the elliptical orbits and varying speeds of Kepler’s system? On
the Aristotelian worldview, the explanation for the movement of the planets and
other heavenly bodies depended on the view of the heavens as a place of
perfection. Continual perfect, uniform circular motion would be appropriate
for the heavens. But elliptical orbits and varying speeds are not the sort of motion
one would expect if the heavens are a region of perfection. So the new beliefs
substantially challenge the belief, on the Aristotelian worldview, that the heavens
are a place of perfection.
Likewise, the part of the Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle that represents the belief in a
fairly small, cozy universe no longer works. If the Earth is in motion about the sun,
then our position in space varies by a huge distance (we know it to be almost
200,000,000 miles) from one part of our orbit to the point in our orbit six months
later. Given the extreme distance we travel as the Earth moves about the sun, the
only explanation for the lack of observed stellar parallax is that the stars are
incredibly, unbelievably, almost unimaginably far away. Thus the universe must
be incredibly vast, and perhaps even inﬁnite.
In keeping with the new view of a large, perhaps inﬁnite universe, the stars came to
be viewed as distributed throughout an immense sea of space rather than embedded
in the sphere of the ﬁxed stars. On this new picture, there is no longer any need for a
sphere of the ﬁxed stars. Recall that the sphere of the ﬁxed stars deﬁned the periphery
of the universe, and the center of that sphere deﬁned the center of the universe. So
without a sphere of the ﬁxed stars, it no longer makes sense to speak of the universe as
having a unique center. And without a center to the universe, the Aristotelian account
of natural motion of the elements – either motion toward the center (for example for
the heavy elements) or away from the center (for example for ﬁre) – no longer works.
In addition, the most general aspect of the Aristotelian view of the universe, the
view of the universe as being teleological and essentialistic, was called into question.

155

156

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

We have already seen how the account of the motion of the heavenly bodies – of
them moving in uniform circular motion because that is the goal-directed, essential
nature of the element ether – was undermined by the acceptance of planets moving
in elliptical orbits at varying speeds. And we saw how the account of the natural
movement of the sublunar elements, due to their goal-directed, internal natures,
was likewise undermined by the new views. While these developments did not
directly show that the long-held view of the universe as teleological and essential­
istic was mistaken, the loss of the teleological, essentialistic account of the
movement of the basic elements certainly called into question the overall view
of the universe as teleological and essentialistic.
Similar problems arise for some common religious views. Recall that the
Aristotelian account originally was not tied to religious issues. But during the
middle ages, especially in Europe, Christian theology and the Aristotelian view of
the universe became tightly intertwined, so that problems for the Aristotelian
view resulted in problems for the traditional religious views. For example, the new
view of the universe as vastly huger than ever imagined, and perhaps inﬁnite,
made little sense. Why would God have created such a universe, with so much
seemingly wasted space? And what is the role of humans in a universe where the
Earth is like a speck of dust moving through a vast, mostly empty space? Again,
Aristotle’s and Ptolemy’s Earth-centered models were not developed for religious
reasons, but nonetheless, the Earth-centered model ﬁt well with western religious
views. Such religious views tended to view humans as the center of creation, and
this ﬁt in well with the belief, on the Aristotelian worldview, that the Earth was the
center of the universe. Likewise, recall that Aristotle’s god was key in the
explanation for the continual motion of the heavenly bodies. In the middle
ages, the Christian God assumed this explanatory role, that is, the heavenly bodies
came to be viewed as moving out of a desire to emulate the perfection of a
religious God. In this way, the Christian God played a role in the scientiﬁc
understanding of the workings of the universe. But as noted earlier, the explan­
ation of the heavenly bodies moving with perfectly circular, uniform motion due
to a desire to emulate the perfection of God no longer works with planets that
move in elliptical orbits at varying speeds. In short, the new discoveries call into
question the idea of a religious God as part of a scientiﬁc view of the workings of
the universe.
Recall the jigsaw puzzle metaphor ﬁrst introduced in Chapter 1. We are seeing
here how the alteration of a core belief, one central to the jigsaw puzzle, in turn
forces changes in the beliefs with which it is intertwined. We are seeing here a
concrete example of that. The problems outlined above stem from the recognition
that the Earth moves about the sun, and thus a core piece of the Aristotelian
worldview, that the Earth is stationary at the center of the universe, is no longer an
acceptable belief. But this quickly snowballs, causing problems for all sorts of
other beliefs within the Aristotelian system. In other words, these problems for
the Aristotelian worldview are not small, isolated problems involving peripheral
pieces of the jigsaw puzzle. For this reason, mere tinkering with the Aristotelian
worldview, replacing old pieces of the jigsaw puzzle with new pieces while still
keeping the overall puzzle, is not a viable option. Instead, what is needed is a new
worldview. And that new worldview will importantly need some new scientiﬁc

18 Problems Facing the Aristotelian Worldview

views. In short, the new worldview will require, as part of it, a new science. We will
turn now to a brief look at what sort of new science was needed.

The Need for a New Science
As emphasized above, the implications of the new discoveries of the early 1600s
went far beyond the issue of whether an Earth-centered or sun-centered view is
correct. Almost the whole of Aristotelian science, which had been the dominant
science for 2,000 years, depends on an Earth-centered universe. Thus, the demise
of the Earth-centered view meant also the demise of Aristotelian science. Worse
yet, there was no science to replace it.
As noted, the Aristotelian explanation of falling bodies – that heavy bodies
naturally tend toward the center of the universe, which was the center of the Earth
– is no longer tenable with an Earth in motion around the sun. So in the early
1600s, there was no explanation of something as simple as why rocks fall. There
likewise was no explanation for how the Earth could be moving at immense
speeds in its orbit around the sun, and yet it feels as if we are stationary. In a
similar vein, there was no explanation for why, when we throw a rock straight up
in the air, it lands back at the spot where it was thrown. Nor is there any
explanation for Kepler’s elliptical orbits, or for that matter, what keeps planets
moving in the ﬁrst place.
This is but a small sample of basic phenomena for which there was no longer an
acceptable explanation, and for which a new science was needed to provide the
required explanations. Most fundamentally, the new science needed to be a
science that was compatible with a moving Earth.

Concluding Remarks
I do not want to give the impression that the Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle remained
intact from the time of Aristotle to the 1600s. In fact, the Aristotelian jigsaw
puzzle underwent various modiﬁcations during that 2,000-year period. For
example, the major religions of the western world were not part of the original
Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle, but those religious views were added to the Aristote­
lian worldview during the middle ages. Likewise, there were modiﬁcations to the
original Aristotelian views of motion, with some of these changes helping to pave
the way for the discovery of the principle of inertia in the 1600s.
Nonetheless, throughout the changes the worldview remained an Aristotelian
worldview, with a corruptible Earth at the center of the universe, perfect heavens
in the region beyond the moon, and the universe conceived of as thoroughly
essentialistic and teleological. It was a relatively small, cozy universe, and a
universe that ﬁt well with the dominant religious views of the time.
The discoveries of the early 1600s brought a change not just in particular
beliefs about the universe, but rather, in the general view of the sort of universe
we live in. The teleological, essentialistic, Earth/human-centered universe had
to go, and with it went the general views of the type of universe we inhabit. The

157

158

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

next two chapters focus on the view of the universe that replaced the Aristote­
lian view.
A word of caution
This is perhaps a good place to brieﬂy repeat a word of caution ﬁrst mentioned in
the Introduction. We are looking at a broad-brushstroke picture of people and
events spanning a huge period of time. In such a broad picture, there is always the
danger of coming away with an overly simpliﬁed and misleading view of certain
inﬂuences and connections between people and events.
An example will help illustrate. We have just seen that the Aristotelian
worldview was no longer viable, given certain discoveries in the 1600s. In addition,
we saw that a new science, one compatible with a moving Earth, was very much
needed. And in the next two chapters, we will see how Newton’s contributions
provided major pieces of this much-needed new science.
It is true that Aristotle’s science was no longer viable. And it is true that a new
science was needed. And it is true that Newton provided key pieces of that new
science. But what is not true – or at best, it would be misleading to come away
with this idea – is that Newton himself was deliberately and directly attempting to
ﬁll the void left by the demise of Aristotelian science. In other words, it would be
easy to come away from a broad-brushstroke picture such as this with the idea
that, for example, Newton was directly responding to, and directly motivated by,
the problems we have just been discussing. But doing so would be a mistake.
As always, the real story is much more complicated. Newton, like all of us, was a
complex individual motivated by a complex array of factors. Rivalries with
contemporaries advocating competing theories, the reception of his early
work, personality clashes, disputes over who discovered what ﬁrst, and even,
arguably, his childhood relationship with his mother inﬂuenced and motivated
Newton. In general, a large array of complex factors played important roles in the
development of Newton’s work.
The general moral is that there are a lot of complexities underlying broad
pictures of the sort we are looking at here. As mentioned in the Introduction, I
think there is substantial value in general approaches such as the one taken in this
book, but I encourage you to keep in mind that there are a lot of subtleties
underlying the broad picture. And also, as stated in the Preface, when you are
ﬁnished with this book I hope you ﬁnd yourself intrigued enough to want to
further explore some of these complexities.
With that brief reminder behind us, let’s move on to consider the development
of the new science and the new worldview.

159

19
Philosophical and Conceptual Connections in the
Development of the New Science
The 1600s were a fascinating time, with an enormous number of changes in the
air – scientiﬁc, conceptual, religious, and political changes, to name just a few.
Contrary to what I think is often assumed, there is a surprising amount of
interplay and cross-fertilization between such areas. Philosophical/conceptual
changes in the 1600s inﬂuenced scientiﬁc discoveries and vice versa; likewise,
religious, political, and scientiﬁc changes all inﬂuenced one another, and in
general, there was a surprisingly large interplay between what we often think of as
separate ﬁelds.
The main goal of this chapter is to illustrate how such areas can inﬂuence one
another. Given space limitations, we will not be able to explore this in any detail,
but it will be possible to get at least a sense of the sorts of inﬂuences that such
seemingly different areas can have on one another. We will look in particular at
how some of the religious and philosophical views of Nicholas de Cusa and
Giordano Bruno inﬂuenced developments in the 1600s, and also at how the
largely metaphysical view of atomism played a role. These are but two examples,
but they should be sufﬁcient to convey a ﬂavor of the interplay and intercon­
nections between seemingly diverse areas. We will begin with some issues
concerning the size of the universe.

The Size of the Universe
Recall that, on the Aristotelian worldview, the universe was thought to be
relatively small. The stars were envisioned as being embedded in a sphere,
with the center of the Earth being the center of that sphere. The sphere of
the ﬁxed stars, as it is generally referred to, was thought to be the outermost
periphery of the universe. And although our predecessors thought of the universe
as being large, they had no idea how incredibly huge the universe would turn out
to be. Compared to our conception of the size of the universe, their view was of a
relatively small universe.
As noted in the previous chapter, this conception of a relatively small universe
would change in the 1600s. To brieﬂy review: with the telescope, Galileo had
observed countless more stars than previously known, which itself suggests the
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

160

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

universe might be larger than previously conceived. More directly, the lack of any
observed stellar parallax, coupled with the growing acceptance that the Earth
travels about the sun, forces one to accept that the universe must be unimaginably
large.
In the late 1500s and early 1600s, the idea of a large, perhaps inﬁnite, universe
was a difﬁcult one to accept. Even today, the size of the universe is mind­
boggling, and there does not seem to be wide appreciation of just how large it is.
To get a sense of just how large a universe we are speaking of, let’s start just by
thinking about our own sun and solar system. Suppose we build a model of our
solar system. To establish a scale, let us imagine that the Earth is the size of a
typical globe (about a foot in diameter). If the Earth is the size of a typical globe,
then the sun would be the size of a 10-story building, and located about two
miles away. Pause for a moment to visualize the scale: the Earth as a globe, and
the sun located two miles away. In just considering the distance from the sun to
the Earth, we are already speaking of quite a substantial distance. Pluto, long
thought to be the outermost planet in our system (and now considered a dwarf
planet), would be about the size of a tennis ball and, again using this scale,
would on average be located about 80 miles away. Recently, many additional
dwarf planets have been discovered. One of these, Sedna, would on our scale be
a touch smaller than a tennis ball and would currently be located over 200 miles
away. But Sedna has a highly eccentric orbit, and it is (as far as we currently
know) the planet or dwarf planet that reaches the greatest distance from the
sun – in a few more decades Sedna will, on the scale we are using, be about
2,000 miles away.
Again, take a moment to visualize this: a ten-story building representing the
sun, a foot-wide globe two miles away representing the Earth, and the furthest
reaching member of our family of planets and dwarf planets going out as far as
2,000 miles away. If we wanted to build an accurate scale model of just our
planetary system, we would need an area taking up the better part of the entire
continental United States. Our solar system is huge.
Now consider the fact that our sun is just one star among the hundreds of
billions of stars in our galaxy. On the scale described above, that is, if the Earth is
the size of a typical globe, the next nearest star would be 500,000 miles away. And
this star is, on a cosmic scale, our immediate next-door neighbor. That is, if the
Earth were the size of a globe, our next-door neighbor in our galaxy would be
500,000 miles away. In short, the stars are separated by an almost unimaginably
large expanse of space.
Moreover, at this point we are still just talking about our own galaxy, that is, the
Milky Way galaxy. The Milky Way galaxy consists of hundreds of billions of stars
in our region of the universe. Incidentally, even in the best of viewing conditions
on the darkest of nights you can see only a small fraction – about 3,000 – of these
stars, and all of the stars you see in the night sky are in our Milky Way galaxy.
With its hundreds of billions of stars, it is difﬁcult to comprehend the sheer
enormity of our galaxy alone. But our galaxy is itself but one of hundreds of
billions of galaxies in the visible universe, each containing as many stars as our
own. Even for us, when we stop to think about it, the universe is an unimaginably
huge place.

19 Development of the New Science

Now try to put yourself in the shoes of someone living in Europe in the early
1600s. You would likely have been raised with the belief that God made the
universe primarily for humans, and you would likely believe, quite reasonably,
that the universe is a relatively small, cozy place, with the Earth at the center.
This picture is a comfortable picture in which the universe seems to make
sense. But now, virtually overnight, there is reason to believe that the Earth is
not the center of the universe, that the universe is not a small, cozy place, but is
actually huge beyond all imagination. Our Earth is like a speck of dust lost in an
inﬁnite sea. It is easy to understand how this idea would have been a very
difﬁcult one to accept.
In earlier centuries, a few philosophers and theologians had argued, primarily
on philosophical grounds, that an inﬁnite universe, with inﬁnitely many stars,
would be the only universe compatible with an inﬁnitely great God. Most notable
among these people were Nicholas de Cusa (1401–64) and Giordano Bruno
(1548–1600). It should be stressed that neither de Cusa nor Bruno were scientists
– their views were based almost exclusively on philosophical and religious
grounds.
During their lives, de Cusa’s and Bruno’s views on an inﬁnite universe were not
widely shared. (Bruno views, for example, led to his condemnation by the
Inquisition, and he was burned alive for heresy in 1600). However, in the early
1600s, when it began to become clear that the universe was huge, and perhaps
inﬁnite, the ideas of de Cusa and Bruno helped make the idea of an inﬁnite
universe more palatable. Their ideas of an inﬁnitely large universe reﬂecting the
inﬁnite greatness of God helped with the acceptance of a difﬁcult new idea.
In a sense, we are talking here of a sort of conceptual Band-Aid. In the 1600s we
are forced to accept that the universe is much, much larger than we ever imagined.
Conceptually, this huge universe makes no sense, and we need some way of
making this new belief ﬁt into our way of conceptualizing the universe. De Cusa’s
and Bruno’s idea helps – the notion that an inﬁnite universe would reﬂect the
inﬁnite greatness of God helps make conceptual sense of the new view of the size
of the universe.
Not only did de Cusa’s and Bruno’s views help make conceptual sense of a huge,
perhaps inﬁnite universe, but, notably, their views were tied in with an old
philosophy called atomism. Atomism dates back to the ancient Greek philoso­
phers Leucippus and Democritus (ﬁfth century BCE), and their successors Epi­
curus (341–270 BCE) and Lucretius (99–55 BCE). As it turns out, atomism became a
popular view in Europe in the late 1500s and the 1600s (during the 1600s, this
atomistic view was more often referred to as a “corpuscular” view). There are a
number of reasons behind the revival of atomism during this period, but part of
this revival was tied to the increasing popularity of the philosophies of de Cusa
and Bruno.
According to the theory of atomism, reality ultimately consists of atoms and
the void. Atoms were envisioned as tiny, indivisible particles – the smallest
possible particles, in fact. The void, on the other hand, was thought of in much the
same way as we think of a vacuum, that is, as completely empty space. Some atoms
are stuck together, and these form the objects we see around us. Other atoms are
simply ﬂying through empty space (that is, through the void). The atoms that

161

162

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

are moving through the void behave something like pool balls – they travel in a
straight line unless they collide with another atom or atoms, in which case they
bounce off each other much as pool balls bounce off each other.
Atomism is much more of a metaphysical, philosophical/conceptual belief than
an empirical belief. One cannot observe atoms moving through the void, nor was
there any good empirical evidence supporting the view that reality ultimately
consists of atoms and the void. But although atomism is more of a philosophical/
conceptual view, it is a view that ﬁt in well with the emerging ideas of this time,
and one that was quite fruitful for developing new scientiﬁc ideas.
For example, consider the principle of inertia. According to the principle of
inertia, an object in motion will remain in motion in a straight line forever, unless
acted upon by an outside force. As we noted earlier, Descartes was the ﬁrst to
provide a clear statement of what we now consider the principle of inertia. And it
is not a coincidence that Descartes was inﬂuenced by the atomistic (or corpus­
cular) view. Recall that inertia, as discussed earlier, is an extremely counterintuitive principle, and one of the more difﬁcult principles for those in the 1600s
to arrive at. But think about atomism, and think about an inﬁnite universe. Focus
on an individual atom moving through space, and let us suppose that this atom
never collides with another atom. According to atomism, how will this atom
behave? Answer: it will keep moving in a straight line forever. But this is
essentially the principle of inertia. In other words, if you have the concept of
an inﬁnite universe, and you conceptualize the universe along the lines of
atomism, then the principle of inertia is much easier to grasp. We ﬁnd, then,
the idea of an inﬁnite universe, and the philosophy of atomism, helping to smooth
the road for one of the central scientiﬁc principles discovered in the 1600s,
namely, the principle of inertia.
Importantly, I do not want to leave the impression that discovering the
principle of inertia was simply a matter of accepting an inﬁnite universe together
with the philosophy of atomism. Discovering the principle of inertia involved a
combination of experimental work and new ways of conceptualizing the universe,
together with a lot of effort by a lot of people over a long period of time. But as
with the situation involving the size of the universe, there was a surprising amount
of interplay between areas that are often thought to be isolated and separated
from one another.
This is just a brief part of a complex story concerning developments and
changes in the 1600s. The acceptance of the belief in a huge, perhaps inﬁnite
universe, and the recognition of the principle of inertia, involved mainly scientiﬁc
beliefs. But as we have seen, the recognition and acceptance of these new scientiﬁc
beliefs involved a surprising number of metaphysical, philosophical/conceptual,
and religious beliefs.

Concluding Remarks
As emphasized at the outset of this chapter, the 1600s were a time of enormous
change, including philosophical/conceptual change, religious change, political
change, and of course scientiﬁc change. The interactions in the 1600s between

19 Development of the New Science

these areas were complex and fascinating, and our goal in this brief chapter was
only to get a sense of some of the ways that philosophical/conceptual ideas, on the
one hand, and more straightforward scientiﬁc ideas, on the other, can inﬂuence
and feed off one another. As usual, for those interested in exploring such
interconnections further, additional sources and readings are suggested in the
Chapter Notes.

163

164

20
Overview of the New Science and the
Newtonian Worldview
The development of the new science in the 1600s was the cumulative effort of
many researchers. The work that capped these efforts, however, was Newton’s
1687 Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. The work is generally
referred to as the Principia (after its Latin title, Principia Mathematica Philos­
ophiae Naturalis). The Principia presented a new physics, compatible with a
moving Earth, and provided the core of what we now think of as Newtonian
science. This work also provides a convenient means by which to explore the
Newtonian worldview, that is, the new jigsaw puzzle of beliefs that would be the
successor to the Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle.
Our main goal in this chapter will be to take a look at both Newton’s science
and the new (Newtonian) worldview. We will begin with an overview of Newton’s
science.

The New Science
As discussed in Chapter 18, core pieces of the Aristotelian worldview cannot be
made to ﬁt with the idea of a moving Earth, and thus the acceptance that the Earth
moves about the sun requires an entirely new science. The new science that
emerged was the product of a great deal of work over a number of decades. As
noted, this new science culminated in the work of Newton. For this reason, we will
primarily look at Newton’s science, although we should keep in mind that his
work owes debts to a number of others. Although we will not discuss it further in
this chapter, it is worth mentioning that Newton developed calculus, indepen­
dently of but at the same time as Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716). Calculus was an
important mathematical tool in the development of Newton’s science, and today
remains one of the most widely used mathematical tools.
The Principia is a substantial work consisting, in the most recent English
translation, of about 600 pages. Newton’s science, however, is often characterized
as consisting, at heart, of three laws of motion together with the principle of
universal gravitation. Certainly, in 600 pages Newton does more than merely
present a handful of laws of motion and the notion of universal gravity. None­
theless, there is a sense in which gravity and the laws of motion are the heart of
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

20 The New Science and the Newtonian Worldview

Newton’s science. In what follows, then, we will consider these, as well as discuss
some general issues about Newton’s science.
The three laws of motion
Newton begins the Principia with a section of deﬁnitions, in which he explains
how he will be using various terms found throughout the book. His next section is
a brief (about 10-page) section in which he presents the three laws of motion.
The ﬁrst law is what we now commonly term the principle of inertia. We ﬁrst
discussed the principle of inertia in Chapter 12, in which it was presented in the
way it typically is today: an object in motion remains in motion in a straight line,
and an object at rest remains at rest, unless acted upon by an outside force.
Newton’s phrasing of the principle is slightly different, but his phrasing and the
usual modern phrasing are equivalent in meaning.
As discussed earlier, the principle of inertia runs contrary to everyday expe­
rience, and it was one of the more difﬁcult principles to work out in the 1600s.
Various precursors to it had been widely discussed in the previous century, and in
the early 1600s Galileo made a variety of investigations of bodies in motion, in
which he almost, but not quite, correctly characterized the key idea of inertia. By
the mid-1600s, Descartes had an accurate characterization of inertia, and New­
ton’s ﬁrst law of motion borrows substantially from Descartes’ characterization.
To understand the second law of motion, consider the behavior of hit baseballs.
The harder you hit the ball, the faster and farther it goes. That is, the change in the
motion of the ball is proportional to the force applied (how hard you hit it). More
fully, the second law of motion states that a change in the motion of an object is
proportional to the force applied to the object, and takes place along the straight
line in which the force is applied. The law is often summarized as F = ma, that is,
that force equals mass times acceleration. As with the baseball example, this
entails that the acceleration of an object will be equal to the force applied divided
by the mass of the object.
The third law states that to any action there is always an opposite and equal
reaction. The standard illustration of this law is the recoil of a gun, in which the
action of the bullet being propelled in one direction results in an equal and
opposite reaction, namely, the recoil of the gun in the opposite direction.
Universal gravitation
The three laws of motion, which again are central ingredients in Newton’s
science, take only about two pages to present in the Principia. The other key
ingredient, the notion of universal gravitation, is somewhat more complicated to
explain. In this section, I want to explain the slow way in which Newton develops
the idea of universal gravitation in the Principia, and then in the ﬁnal section of
this chapter (just before the concluding comments), I want to give an idea of why
he takes this slow, careful approach. Let’s begin with the way universal gravitation
is typically presented currently.
Universal gravitation is generally presented as a mutually attractive force
between any two objects. For example, the gravitational attraction of the sun

165

166

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

attracts the Earth toward the sun, and at the same time, the gravitational
attraction of the Earth attracts the sun toward the Earth. Likewise, when I
drop a book, the Earth’s gravity attracts the book toward the Earth, but at the
same time, the gravitational attraction of the book attracts the Earth toward the
book. The gravitational attraction of the book has virtually no effect on the Earth
because the Earth is so enormously more massive than the book; likewise, in the
sun–Earth example, the fact that the sun is so much more massive than the Earth
explains why the Earth’s gravity has relatively little effect on the sun as compared
to the sun’s effect on the Earth.
More particularly, the gravitational attraction between two objects is propor­
tional to the product of their masses. That is, the more massive the objects, the
greater the gravitational attraction. Also, the attraction is inversely proportional
to the square of the distance between the objects, so that as the distance between
objects increases, the force of the gravitational attraction between them dimin­
ishes rapidly.
Such is the way universal gravitation is typically presented these days. And in
fact, this characterization of universal gravitation is presented in the Principia.
But unlike the laws of motion, which are stated fully and concisely in the
beginning of the book, this characterization of gravity emerges slowly.
Not counting the preface, Newton ﬁrst discusses gravity in the ﬁrst few pages of
the Principia, in the section on deﬁnitions. At this point, though, Newton uses
“gravity” only to refer to whatever it is that attracts objects to the Earth, and he
clearly is not using the term in the sense of universal gravitation. Much later in the
book (400 pages later, in fact), Newton shows that the Earth’s gravity must extend
at least to the moon, and is responsible for the orbit of the moon. He also shows
that whatever force keeps the moons of other planets (for example, the moons of
Jupiter) in their orbits, that force must have the same characteristics as the Earth’s
gravity (that is, the attractive force is proportional to the masses of the bodies, and
is inversely proportional to the square of the distance between the bodies). He also
shows that whatever force keeps the planets in orbit about the sun must likewise
have the same characteristics as the Earth’s gravity. At this point, at Proposition 7
of Book 3, he is ready to generalize the notion of gravity: Gravity exists in all bodies
universally.
Here, then, we ﬁnally have the radical notion of universal gravitation. And by
the end of the Principia, Newton has treated us to an impressive display of the
explanatory power of universal gravitation, coupled with the laws of motion. The
Principia is a revolutionary work, and the range of phenomena that can be
handled by this small number of ingredients (the three laws of motion plus
universal gravitation) is truly impressive.

Overview of the Newtonian Worldview
Again, the Aristotelian worldview is an Earth-centered worldview. And the belief
that the Earth is at the center of the universe is not merely a peripheral belief, but a
core belief, one that cannot be replaced without replacing most of the pieces of the
jigsaw puzzle. Newton’s science provided many of the scientiﬁc pieces of a new

20 The New Science and the Newtonian Worldview

puzzle – in particular, Newton provided a science with extraordinary explanatory
power and, notably, one compatible with a moving Earth. Recall that most of the
pieces of the Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle – and not just the scientiﬁc pieces, but the
philosophical/conceptual pieces as well – are not compatible with the new
science. In other words, we needed a range of new philosophical/conceptual
pieces to accompany the scientiﬁc pieces supplied by Newton.
For example, on the Aristotelian worldview the universe was viewed as
teleological and essentialistic. Objects behaved as they did because of internal,
essential natures. But with Newton’s science, objects no longer behave because of
internal essences; rather, objects behave as they do largely because of the
inﬂuence of external forces. The entire Aristotelian view of the universe as a
universe full of goals and purposes does not ﬁt with the new science, and indeed,
the universe begins to be viewed as more like a machine. In the same way that
parts of a machine push and pull against one another, and the behavior of the
various parts is due to the forces applied to them by other parts, so likewise the
behavior of objects in the universe comes to be viewed as due to the push and pull
of other objects and forces acting on them.
This machine metaphor becomes the dominant metaphor for the new worldview. And this sort of universe, in which the push and pull of external forces are
central to understanding the behavior of objects in the universe, is almost
completely the opposite of the overall Aristotelian view. In short, the teleological
and essentialistic view of the universe, which went hand in hand with the science
of the Aristotelian worldview, is replaced by a mechanistic, machine-like view of
the universe, which goes hand in hand with the new science.
Accompanying the machine metaphor, the view of God changed as well.
Again, for Aristotle himself, the gods were not religious gods at all, but rather
were needed to explain what kept the stars and planets in motion. And as
previously mentioned, in later centuries Aristotle’s conception of the gods was
replaced with the Christian/Judaic/Islamic conception of God. So although the
details of the conception of God changed during the Aristotelian worldview,
one central Aristotelian conception remained, that being the idea that God was
a necessary component in the minute-to-minute workings of the universe. In
other words, in the Aristotelian worldview, God, or something like it, was
needed for scientiﬁc reasons, that is, as a constant source of the motion of the
heavenly bodies.
But with the new science, nothing like this is needed to run the universe. The
motion of the planets, for example, is explained as a consequence of inertia (a
body in motion remains in motion, so the planets, being in motion, will remain in
motion) together with gravity (which explains why the planets move about the
sun rather than going off in a straight line). In short, with the new science, God is
no longer needed to run the universe.
Religious beliefs tend to be deeply entrenched, so not surprisingly, most people
did not abandon their religious beliefs. But the concept of God changed
considerably. In particular, God came to be viewed as a sort of engineer, a
sort of watchmaker God, one who designed and constructed the universe and set
it in motion. But thereafter the universe runs along without the constant
intervention needed in the previous worldview.

167

168

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Likewise, the general conception of an individual’s role in society changed. The
Aristotelian worldview included what might be considered a hierarchical outlook.
That is, much as objects had natural places in the universe, so likewise people had
natural places in the overall order of things. As an example, consider the divine
right of kings. The idea was that the individual who was king was destined for this
position – that was his proper place in the overall order of things. It is interesting
to note that one of the last monarchs to maintain the doctrine of the divine right of
kings was the English monarch Charles I. He argued for this doctrine –
unconvincingly, it might be noted – right up to his overthrow, trial, and execution
in the 1640s. It is probably not a coincidence that the major recent political
revolutions in the western world – the English revolution in the 1640s, followed
by the American and French revolutions – with their emphasis on individual
rights, came only after the rejection of the Aristotelian worldview.
In general, the Aristotelian worldview included a conception of a small, cozy
universe, with the Earth at the center. The universe was full of natural goals and
purposes, and the outlook was teleological and essentialistic. This extended to
people as well, who had their natural places in the overall order of things, much as
objects have their natural places in the universe. And God, or something like God,
was needed on a day-to-day, minute-to-minute basis, to keep the universe in motion.
All of these views change with the emerging new worldview. The universe is
now viewed as huge, and perhaps inﬁnite, with our sun merely as the center of the
revolution of the planets in our solar system. The universe was now viewed as
machine-like, with no purposes or goals to explain the behavior of objects. Rather,
objects behaved as they did as the result of external, purposeless forces. Nor was
God, or anything like God, needed to run the universe. Rather, the universe ticks
on, day after day, much like a watch ticks on.

Philosophical Reﬂections: Instrumentalist and Realist
Attitudes Toward Newton’s Concept of Gravity
Before closing this chapter, it is worth taking a minute to discuss a rather
interesting aspect of the usual Newtonian view of gravity, and one that ties in
with some of the key philosophical issues we have discussed. Moreover, this will
go some way toward explaining why, as discussed above, Newton took such a slow
and careful approach to presenting the notion of gravity in the Principia.
I want to spend a moment discussing how, when viewed a certain way, the
notion of gravity is a quite odd notion. Let me begin with an example I will return
to later in the book. Suppose I put a pen on the table, and I ask you to move the
pen, but without having any sort of contact whatsoever with the pen. You are not
allowed to touch the pen, blow on the pen, throw objects at it, shake the table it is
on, or have any sort of contact at all with the pen. Yet I am asking you to move the
pen in spite of not being allowed to have any contact with it. You almost certainly
will think I am asking you to do something impossible. And our sense that I’m
asking you to do something impossible comes from a common conviction, and
one that goes back at least to the ancient Greeks, that one thing (for example, you)

20 The New Science and the Newtonian Worldview

cannot inﬂuence another thing (for example, the pen) unless there is some sort of
contact or communication between the two. This conviction, to use a common
phrase, is often summarized by saying that there can be no “action at a distance.”
Now let’s return to the notion of gravity. Gravity is usually conceived of as an
attractive force between bodies. To use a typical example, the gravitational force
of the Earth attracts my pen, so that when I release the pen, it falls toward the
ﬂoor. And if we ask “Why did the pen fall?” the usual answer would be that it fell
because it was under the inﬂuence of this gravitational force.
Likewise, if we ask whether gravity is a real force, that is, whether gravity really
exists, the usual answer is “Of course it does.” That is, people typically take a
realist attitude toward gravity, viewing it as a force that really exists, and that
largely explains much of the everyday phenomena we observe around us.
I suspect that most of us take gravity with a realist attitude largely because we
have been raised with the notion of gravity from an early age, and so we tend not
to notice that there are some rather odd features of gravity, at least gravity taken
with a realist attitude. To see these odd features, contrast gravity with other cases
where there is attraction between objects. For example, suppose I put a rubber
band around two pens, and pull the pens apart, thereby stretching the rubber
band connecting them. In this case, the pens are, in a sense, attracted toward each
other. And if I release the pens, they will quickly move toward each other. But in
this case, the nature of the attraction is easily understood – the pens are
connected by a stretched rubber band, and it is exactly this stretched rubber
band that is the cause of the attraction between the two pens.
We can easily understand the nature of the attraction in the case of the pens
attached by a stretched rubber band. But now return to the dropped pen example,
and note that there seems to be no connection between the pen and the Earth.
There is no rubber band connecting the Earth and pen, no strings, no nothing. Yet
in spite of the fact that there seems to be no connection whatsoever between the
pen and Earth, the pen moves toward the Earth when released. Viewed this way,
gravity doesn’t sound like science; it sounds like magic.
In short, if taken with a realist attitude – that is, if gravity is thought of as a really
existing force – then the effect of gravity sounds a great deal like some sort of
mysterious action at a distance. Such invisible forces acting at a distance were
often referred to as “occult” forces, and there was a long history of rejecting
proposals that seemed to include such forces. Kepler, for example, early in the
1600s had suggested that the tides might result from inﬂuences of the moon (an
idea that turned out, eventually, to be on the right track). But Kepler received
substantial criticism, including from Galileo, for suggesting such occult forces. It
had been taken as obvious, going back at least to the ancient Greeks, that there can
be no action at a distance, no such occult forces.
When Newton ﬁrst published the Principia, there were quite a number of
critics who attacked him for introducing a force that required mysterious action at
a distance. Some of these critics were quite inﬂuential, including, to name just one
among many, Gottfried Leibniz (noted earlier as the co-developer of calculus).
Leibniz criticized Newton speciﬁcally for introducing occult forces into science.
And the basis of this criticism was exactly the problem noted – that gravity seems
to involve a mysterious action at a distance.

169

170

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

One way to handle this criticism is to go instrumental, that is, to take gravity
with an instrumentalist attitude. And indeed, Newton himself typically professed
to take an instrumentalist attitude toward gravity. To get a better sense of what
this would amount to, consider again the dropped pen. Newton’s equations,
including those concerning gravity, can be used to make excellent predictions
about how the pen will fall (for example, the rate of acceleration of the pen).
Taking an instrumentalist attitude would essentially involve viewing such equa­
tions as providing an excellent account of the way that objects behave, while
remaining agnostic on the issue of why they behave that way. In other words, one
can use the equations, especially those involving gravity, to provide excellent
predictions, while remaining silent on the issue of whether gravity is a “real” force.
Newton did hold out the hope that a realistic account of gravity could be given,
consistent with the mathematical treatment he provided in the Principia, and in a
way that involved only mechanical interactions with no action at a distance. But
although the next two centuries would see somewhat different treatments of
gravity (for example, the notion that objects are responding to a gravitational ﬁeld
acting locally, that is, without requiring action at a distance, would be one
alternative approach), no completely unproblematic account would be forthcom­
ing. At least, all the accounts are problematic when viewed from a realist
perspective. None of the accounts, including Newton’s, is problematic so long
as one adopts a purely instrumentalist stance. Eventually, as we will discuss in
later chapters, Einstein’s general theory of relativity will provide an account of
gravity that does not involve action at a distance. But as we will see, Einstein’s
account of gravity is very different from the Newtonian view of gravity that most
of us were raised with.

Concluding Remarks
The old Aristotelian worldview was incompatible with the new discoveries of the
1600s. Its replacement certainly did not develop overnight, but eventually the new
outlook described above emerged, and it is this outlook that we will refer to as the
Newtonian worldview. As with the Aristotelian worldview, the Newtonian worldview developed over time, but it retained the core view of a mechanistic, machine­
like universe.
One of the features of science as it developed in the 1600s was an increasing
appeal to laws, for example, Kepler’s laws of planetary motion or Newton’s laws of
motion. The increasing prominence of scientiﬁc laws raises some interesting
philosophical questions, for example, what is a scientiﬁc law? In the next chapter,
we take a brief look at some of the puzzling issues that arise with the notion of
such laws. Then in the following chapter, we will sketch some of the ways the
Newtonian worldview developed over the next two centuries.

171

21
Philosophical Interlude: What Is a Scientiﬁc Law?
Since the 1600s, the notion of scientiﬁc laws has played an increasingly prominent
role in science. In earlier chapters we discussed, for example, Kepler’s laws of
planetary motion, Newton’s laws of motion, and Newton’s characterization of the
principle of universal gravitation. And in the next chapter, we will brieﬂy see other
examples that emerged in the centuries following the general acceptance of the
Newtonian picture. For example, we will look at principles involving electrical
attractions, principles expressing relationships between electrical and magnetic
phenomena, and many others. All of these are often taken as scientiﬁc laws. These
sorts of laws seem to capture something fundamental about physical phenomena,
and the search for, and characterization of, these sorts of laws has been an
important part of science since the scientiﬁc changes of the 1600s.
But what is a scientiﬁc law? The main goal of this brief chapter is to illustrate, as
happens so often, that once we start to look into this question, we quickly run into
some deeply puzzling issues. Attempts to address these and other issues sur­
rounding scientiﬁc laws, especially in the past 50 or so years, have resulted in a
quite complex set of proposals, arguments, counterarguments, counterproposals,
and the like. One thing that is clear is that, after decades of debate by knowl­
edgeable and articulate defenders of various accounts, there is no consensus on
the question of what a scientiﬁc law is or how best to characterize them.
The details of this debate are beyond the scope of this chapter, though as usual
the Chapter Notes will point to additional material for those who would like to
delve into this in greater detail. But it is not particularly difﬁcult to get a sense of
some of the puzzling issues that quickly arise when exploring the notion of a
scientiﬁc law. So the more modest goal of this chapter will be to convey a sense of
some of these puzzling issues.

Scientiﬁc Laws
Philosophers, especially for roughly the past 50 years, have tended to distinguish
between scientiﬁc laws, on the one hand, and laws of nature on the other. Much
has been written on the distinction between the two, but here is one way to brieﬂy
characterize that distinction. What we tend to think of as scientiﬁc laws – for
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

172

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

example, Kepler’s laws of planetary motion, Newton’s laws of motion, the
principle of universal gravitation, and the like – tend to only approximate the
way objects behave (more on this below). Kepler’s second law, for example, at best
characterizes how a planet would orbit in a two-body system, that is, if the only
bodies in existence were the planet and the sun. In our actual solar system, in
which every planet is inﬂuenced by all sorts of factors, including the gravitational
inﬂuence of other planets, Kepler’s second law only approximately characterizes
the orbit of a planet.
But because scientiﬁc laws such as Kepler’s tend to closely approximate the
behavior of objects, it is common to think that such laws are somehow reﬂecting,
even if only approximately, some deeper feature of the world. And the deeper
feature reﬂected by a scientiﬁc law would presumably be a law of nature. So
roughly, it is common to characterize a law of nature as being some fundamental
feature of the universe responsible for the way the universe works, while scientiﬁc
laws are often thought of as principles that approximately reﬂect those laws of
nature.
In what follows I will primarily focus on scientiﬁc laws, though issues involving
the fundamental features of the world that such laws presumably reﬂect will often
arise. Let’s begin with two features commonly associated with scientiﬁc laws.
Common features associated with scientiﬁc laws
It is common to think of a scientiﬁc law as reﬂecting some fundamental,
exceptionless aspect of the universe, that is, as reﬂecting some way in which
things must behave, as opposed to merely reﬂecting how some things happen to
behave. Consider, for example, what we often refer to as Kepler’s second law of
planetary motion. This is the law we ﬁrst discussed in Chapter 16, and it is often
referred to as the “equal areas” law. By way of a brief reminder, recall that this law
basically states that a line drawn from a planet to the sun will sweep out equal
areas in equal time. (It might help to refer back to Figure 16.3.)
As suggested, we tend to view this law as reﬂecting, or at least partly reﬂecting,
some basic, exceptionless regularity in the universe. Notably, I say “at least partly
reﬂecting” because, strictly speaking, such a law would at best be completely
accurate only under ideal circumstances, for example, if the planet were not
inﬂuenced by any other forces such as the gravitational attraction of other bodies
in the solar system. More will be said below on issues involving ideal circum­
stances. The key point I want to draw attention to here is that the law is usually
viewed as reﬂecting (or at least approximately reﬂecting) an exceptionless
regularity, that is, planets always behave in this way, and presumably always
have, and, so long as there are planets, always will. In this way, laws are typically
viewed as different from most other regularities we observe. For example, it is a
regularity that my local diner usually has hot coffee available during hours they
are open. But this is not an exceptionless regularity – they occasionally, though
not often, run out. Likewise, it is a regularity that the average temperature (in the
northern hemisphere, at least) in June is higher than the average temperature in
May. But this too is not an exceptionless regularity. Not often, but occasionally,
May is hotter than June.

21 What Is a Scientiﬁc Law?

But a statement such as Kepler’s second law is usually viewed as saying
something about the way planets always behave, not merely about how they
usually behave. And again, this is generally viewed as a key feature of scientiﬁc
laws. For now, let’s log this idea, that is, that reﬂecting an exceptionless regularity
seems to be a key feature of a scientiﬁc law.
Another key feature we usually associate with scientiﬁc laws is that we view
them as reﬂecting objective features of the world. Although we have occasionally
touched upon the idea of objectivity in this book, we have not discussed it in any
detail. So a few words on this are in order.
The key idea behind the way I am using objective here involves whether
something is or is not dependent on humans. More speciﬁcally, we tend to view
something as objective if we think it would have existed even if humans had never
existed, and otherwise, we tend not to view it as objective. I should note that this is
not the only sense of the word “objective,” but it is the sense in which I am using
the term here.
Consider, for example, some popular dessert dish, say chocolate mousse.
Chocolate mousse appears to have ﬁrst been invented in France in the 1700s,
and thereafter became increasingly popular around the world. Chocolate mousse
is clearly a human invention, and had humans never existed – for that matter,
probably had the French never existed – chocolate mousse likewise would never
have existed. In this sense, then, chocolate mousse is not an objective feature of
the world (again, in the sense of the word “objective” as we are using it here).
In contrast, we usually think of the planet Jupiter as being objective. That is,
most of us are of the view that even if humans had never evolved, if humans had
never appeared, Jupiter would still have existed. We tend, then, to think of Jupiter
as importantly different from chocolate mousse – the former’s existence does not
seem dependent on humans’ existence, whereas the latter does. (Incidentally, the
name “Jupiter” is of course not objective, that is, this word is clearly a human
invention. But we typically think that the object the word names, the planet we call
Jupiter, would have existed even if humans had never existed.)
Moreover – and here is where we tie this back in with Kepler’s second law – in a
scenario such as that just described, where there are no humans, we tend to think
that Jupiter would still have orbited the sun just as it does now. In particular, we
tend to think that Jupiter, had humans never existed, still would have orbited in
accordance with Kepler’s second law. In other words, we tend to view Kepler’s
second law as capturing an objective feature of the world.
As with the case of the word “Jupiter,” the phrase “Kepler’s second law” would
of course not have existed had humans not existed. But just as we tend to think
that the object our word “Jupiter” names would have existed had humans not
existed, so too we tend to think that the regularity captured by our phrase
“Kepler’s second law” would still have been a feature of the universe even if
humans had not existed. And again, this is just to say that we tend to view Kepler’s
second law, and other scientiﬁc laws, as capturing objective features of the world.
There is much more that can be said by way of characterizing common views
about scientiﬁc laws. But for the sake of our discussion, let’s just focus on the two
features of laws we have identiﬁed above. First, that we tend to view such laws as
reﬂecting exceptionless regularities, and second, that we tend to view such laws as

173

174

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

reﬂecting objective features of the universe. When we explore these features, we
quickly run into difﬁcult and puzzling issues.
Exceptionless regularities
Let’s begin by exploring the ﬁrst of the presumed features of scientiﬁc laws discussed
above, that is, the notion that laws reﬂect exceptionless regularities. First, note that
exceptionless regularities are everywhere, but most such regularities are ones we do
not want to consider candidates for scientiﬁc laws. Here are two examples. First, all
English sentences ever written have consisted of fewer than a million words. Thus,
this is an exceptionless regularity about English sentences. But we would never
consider “all English sentences consist of fewer than a million words” as a candidate
for a scientiﬁc law. As a second example, as far as I can remember (and for no good
reason) I have always put my pants on left leg ﬁrst. Assuming my memory is correct,
this too is an exceptionless regularity, but certainly not something we want to
consider proposing a scientiﬁc law about. We could sit here and generate thousands
of examples of similar sorts of exceptionless regularities, the vast majority of which
we would not want to consider candidates for scientiﬁc laws.
It seems, then, that although capturing an exceptionless regularity is an
important part of being a scientiﬁc law, it turns out that we do not want to
consider the overwhelming majority of exceptionless regularities to be candidates
for scientiﬁc laws. This observation raises a simple, but difﬁcult question: What is
the difference between exceptionless regularities that do underlie scientiﬁc laws,
and exceptionless regularities that do not?
There is a fairly common response to this question, albeit a response that raises
its own difﬁcult issues. The response involves what are commonly referred to as
counterfactual conditionals, or just counterfactuals. I might note that, besides
their role in this context, counterfactuals play roles in a variety of other contexts,
scientiﬁc and otherwise. Our next task, then, will be to clarify what counter­
factuals are.
Counterfactuals
Counterfactuals are a common feature of everyday speech and thinking. So it is
almost certain that you are already familiar with the key ideas behind counter­
factuals, even if you have not before come across the terms “counterfactual” or
“counterfactual conditionals.”
As usual, let’s begin with some examples. Imagine yourself saying these
statements: “If only I had studied harder for that test, I would have done better.”
Or “If I had not stayed out so late, I would not have overslept this morning.” Or “If
I had remembered my cell phone needed recharging, then the battery would not
now be dead.” Or “If I had gotten to the ticket counter earlier, I would have gotten
tickets before they sold out.” And so on.
These are all examples of counterfactual conditionals, or what are often just
called counterfactuals. Notice ﬁrst that each of these is a conditional sentence,
that is, an if–then sort of sentence. This explains the “conditional” part of the
phrase “counterfactual conditional.”

21 What Is a Scientiﬁc Law?

Notice also that in every example, the “if” part reﬂects something that did not
happen and that you know did not happen. You did not in fact study as hard as you
might have for the test. You did not in fact get back from your night out as early as
you might have. And so on. In each case, the “if” part of the statement reﬂects
something that is not correct, that is, that is contrary to fact. Or in other words,
the “if” parts of each statement reﬂect something that is counterfactual, and this is
where the “counterfactual” part of the phrase “counterfactual conditional” comes
from.
Counterfactuals play an important linguistic role in everyday life and everyday
thinking, in that they allow us to express how we think things would have turned
out had conditions been different. If, counter to fact, you had studied harder for
the test, then you would have done better. If, counter to fact, you had remembered
to charge the battery in your cell phone, then that battery would not now be dead.
And so on. These sorts of expressions are extremely common, and again, they play
an important role in enabling us to express how we think things would have been
had circumstances been different from the way they in fact were.
As indicated, counterfactuals are commonly seen as a key to distinguishing
exceptionless regularities that we tend to consider candidates for scientiﬁc laws,
and exceptionless regularities that we do not want to consider as candidates for
scientiﬁc laws. The usual account of how counterfactuals do this is as follows.
Consider again examples of exceptionless regularities that we are not inclined
to think of as underlying scientiﬁc laws, say the one above about all English
sentences having fewer than a million words, or the one about the way I always put
my pants on. Notice that these regularities, while accurate given the way things
happen to be, would not have been true under a wide variety of alternative
circumstances. For example, if there had been a contest with a sizable cash award
for constructing the largest grammatically correct English sentence, then it is
likely that someone would have concocted an English sentence of more than a
million words. And so under this counterfactual scenario, the regularity about
English sentences would not hold. Likewise, if a computer programmer, say for
fun, had developed a program for constructing long English sentences, then again
the regularity about English sentences would probably not still be accurate.
Likewise for my pants behavior. If at some time in my past I had broken one of my
legs, chances are this would have altered my behavior, and the regularity about my
pants behavior would not have been an exceptionless regularity. Likewise had
someone offered me a sum of cash for changing my behavior, or under any
number of other counterfactual scenarios, the regularity about the way I put on
my pants would no longer be an exceptionless regularity. In short, these sorts of
regularities would not have been true under a wide variety of alternative
circumstances.
In contrast, the regularity underlying Kepler’s second law of planetary motion
seems to remain an exceptionless regularity under any number of counterfactual situations. For example, had Jupiter been somewhat closer to the sun, or
further from the sun, or more massive, or less massive, or had been a rocky
planet rather than a gas giant, or under any number of a wide variety of
counterfactual situations, Jupiter would still have behaved according to Kepler’s
second law.

175

176

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

In short, the sorts of exceptionless regularities that we tend to view as captured
by scientiﬁc laws, such as Kepler’s second law of planetary motion, tend to be
resistant, in a certain sense, to counterfactual situations. In particular, such
regularities tend to remain true even had circumstances been different in any of a
wide variety of ways.
This distinction, then, between regularities that hold true under a wide variety
of counterfactual conditions, versus regularities that do not, is often viewed as a
key difference between exceptionless regularities that are candidates for scientiﬁc
laws, and those that are not.
Will this appeal to counterfactuals sufﬁce to resolve the problem of distin­
guishing between law-like regularities, and mere accidental, non-law-like regu­
larities? Unfortunately, not in any sort of an easy way. In particular, an appeal to
counterfactuals will not solve the problem of distinguishing law-like regularities
from non-law-like regularities without raising equally problematic issues. Those
issues involve two considerations, one having to do with context dependence, and
the other having to do with what are commonly termed ceteris paribus clauses. A
brief discussion of each of these is in order.
Context dependence

Although the above appeal to counterfactuals seems, at least initially, to make
substantial headway on the problem of adequately distinguishing regularities we
want to view as underlying scientiﬁc laws from regularities that do not, as so often
happens, it does not take much probing to uncover further problematic issues.
The ﬁrst has to do with the context dependence of counterfactuals.
Above, in the preliminary discussion of counterfactuals, I withheld an impor­
tant feature of counterfactuals, namely, whether we tend to view a counterfactual
as true or false depends very much on the context. Consider again the example
from above, “If I had remembered my cell phone needed recharging, then the
battery would not now be dead.” In the discussion above, we were implicitly
assuming a more or less normal context, in which you would presumably want
your cell phone charged. In such a context, we’re inclined to treat this counterfactual as true.
But now consider an alternative context. Say you have a big test tomorrow, and
you decide you do not want your cell phone to be charged until the test is over, so
you won’t be tempted to lose time talking on it. In this context, the counterfactual
“If I had remembered my cell phone needs recharging, then the battery would not
now be dead” is false – in this context you presumably would have remembered
you did not want your phone charged and would have let the battery remain dead.
Or perhaps you had a ﬁght with a friend and want to remain out of contact for a
while, and so you prefer leaving your cell phone uncharged as a convenient excuse
for not returning calls. Or any number of other possibilities. In short, there are
endless contexts in which the counterfactual in question would be true, and
endless contexts in which it would be false. And likewise for almost every
counterfactual.
In short, whether a counterfactual is true or false is notoriously contextdependent. And the problem this raises, as it pertains to scientiﬁc laws, is this:
generally (maybe always), when the truth or falsity of something is context­

21 What Is a Scientiﬁc Law?

dependent, that means that the truth or falsity depends on the knowledge and
interests of the parties involved. And this in turn means the truth or falsity
depends on people, and the interests and knowledge of those people.
At this point you are probably seeing the looming problem. Recall one of the main
features of the typical view of scientiﬁc laws, discussed at the outset of this section,
namely, that scientiﬁc laws are generally viewed as reﬂecting objective features of
the world, that is, features that are independent of humans. But now we seem to
have painted ourselves into a corner. We seem to need to appeal to counterfactuals
in order to characterize what counts as a scientiﬁc law, in particular, in order to
distinguish exceptionless regularities that are candidates for scientiﬁc laws from
exceptionless regularities that are mere accidental regularities. But the appeal to
counterfactuals brings with it context dependence. So if characterizing scientiﬁc
laws requires counterfactuals, and counterfactuals are context-dependent, then
counterfactuals are dependent on humans (or more precisely, the truth or falsity of
counterfactuals is dependent on humans). So appealing to counterfactuals under­
mines the seeming objectivity of scientiﬁc laws.
Ceteris paribus clauses

There is another basic issue that arises in considering scientiﬁc laws as reﬂecting
exceptionless regularities. Consider again Kepler’s second law of planetary
motion. If we look more closely at how planets actually orbit, we’ll notice
something interesting, namely, that Kepler’s second law does not, strictly speak­
ing, reﬂect an exceptionless regularity about planetary orbits.
The basic problem was mentioned earlier, and is easy to see. All sorts of factors
can inﬂuence the orbit of a planet. For example, planets are occasionally struck by
asteroids and comets, and such impacts inﬂuence the orbit of a planet. A
particularly spectacular collision occurred in the 1990s, when a massive comet
collided with Jupiter, and while this collision did not throw Jupiter into anything
like an entirely new orbit, it certainly had noticeable effects on Jupiter’s orbit,
including the effect that, for the period right around the collision, Jupiter did not
quite obey Kepler’s second law. That collision was a particularly spectacular one,
but less spectacular ones occur all the time. Even more recently Jupiter was again
struck by a quite large object, leaving a disturbance in Jupiter’s atmosphere the
size of the Earth, and again altering the orbit of Jupiter. Or consider the massive
earthquake of 2011 off the coast of Japan. This earthquake is most memorable for
the resulting tsunami that caused substantial loss of life and the meltdown of
multiple nuclear cores in the Fukushima energy facility in northern Japan. Less
well known is that the earthquake also affected the spin of the Earth with a
corresponding (albeit slight) effect on the Earth’s orbit.
Although events such as these provide somewhat dramatic examples, less
dramatic events are happening all the time. Planets are constantly under all sorts
of inﬂuences, from the gravitational inﬂuences of other planets, to passing comets
and asteroids. Even the passing spacecraft we occasionally send will have an
inﬂuence. And these effects, though small, are such that planets never orbit
exactly as characterized by Kepler’s second law.
This situation – in which events disturb a situation and seemingly prevent a law
from applying where it otherwise would apply – are present with probably every

177

178

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

situation involving an alleged scientiﬁc law. Or to put the point another way, there
is probably no scientiﬁc law that is straightforwardly, strictly followed.
The usual tack for attempting to avoid this issue is to employ what are termed
ceteris paribus clauses, where ceteris paribus is a phrase roughly meaning “all else
being equal.” So, for example, we can say that if Jupiter is a planet, then ceteris
paribus, that is, all else being equal (for example, there are no asteroid or comet
impacts, no inﬂuences from other planets, and so on), it will obey Kepler’s second
law of planetary motion.
Not surprisingly, this account raises issues, of which I will mention two. First,
you might already have noticed the ties between the discussion of ceteris paribus
clauses and the discussion above of counterfactuals. The two are related. Reading
Kepler’s second law as one that is accompanied by ceteris paribus clauses amounts
to saying, in the case of Jupiter, that if it were the case that Jupiter was
experiencing no additional forces, then it would orbit in accordance with Kepler’s
law. But we know at the outset that Jupiter will in fact experience such additional
forces. So the statement just made is itself a counterfactual, and so this account
seems to inherit the problems we found above with counterfactuals.
In addition, note that there is no way to specify all the possible ceteris paribus
clauses, simply because there are too many possibilities. Above, we mentioned
asteroid impacts, comet impacts, earthquakes, the inﬂuence of passing spacecraft,
and the like. But there are indeﬁnitely many such inﬂuences, and we could not
possibly list them all. The best we could do is to list inﬂuences such as comets,
asteroids, and passing spacecraft, and then say something like “and other similar
inﬂuences.” But notions of similarity are obviously tied to human interests. For
example, whether two things are or are not considered similar depends crucially
on the interests of those making the judgment. And so we again run into a
problem related to what we saw above. If characterizing scientiﬁc laws requires
appeals to ceteris paribus clauses, and such appeals require a notion of similarity
which is itself dependent on human judgments, then our account of scientiﬁc laws
again seems to lose the notion that scientiﬁc laws are objective.

Concluding Remarks
In concluding, I want to return to a point made at the outset of this chapter,
namely, that the issues surrounding scientiﬁc laws have been the subject of
extensive discussion and debate, especially over the past 50 or so years. That
discussion and debate, while including the issues raised in this chapter, goes well
beyond these issues.
My main goal in this chapter was not to summarize all the discussion
concerning scientiﬁc laws that has taken place in recent decades. Rather, the
main goal was to illustrate how quickly one runs into difﬁcult issues, once one
begins probing a bit into the question of what a scientiﬁc law is. The material
above will, I hope, convey a ﬂavor of some of the difﬁcult issues that arise. In many
ways, while certainly not an exceptionless regularity, this is a recurring pattern:
once we probe into what seem to be relatively straightforward issues and concepts
involved in science, we quickly run into difﬁcult and puzzling problems.

179

22
The Development of the Newtonian Worldview,
1700–1900
As with the Aristotelian worldview, the Newtonian worldview was not a
completely static set of beliefs, but underwent modiﬁcations and additions
in the centuries following the 1600s. Nonetheless, the core elements of the new
view, those that originated in the work of various scientists in the 1600s and
with important ties to Newton’s Principia Mathematica of the late 1600s,
remained fairly steady. Whereas Newton’s most inﬂuential work was in physics,
one of the general trends in the following centuries was that other branches of
science – chemistry, biology, what we now think of as electrodynamics, and
others – underwent substantial changes, and in doing so took on a more or less
Newtonian form.
The main goal of this chapter is to illustrate some of the key scientiﬁc changes
that took place between roughly 1700 and 1900, and then, at the end of the
chapter, to look brieﬂy at two key scientiﬁc problems that remained as we entered
the twentieth century. This was an extremely rich period of scientiﬁc develop­
ment, and we can only get an overview of some of these changes. In general, our
approach will be to try to convey a ﬂavor of how promising the development of the
Newtonian view was during this period, and the ways in which major branches of
science changed, and changed so as to come under a broad Newtonian umbrella.
These branches of science became, in a sense, “Newtonized.” This period was so
promising that by about 1900, it appeared that most of the major questions about
the world had been answered, and answered within a Newtonian framework. Let’s
begin with an overview of developments in some of the major branches of science.

Remarks on the Development of the Major Branches of
Science, 1700–1900
Our ﬁrst task will be to make a few brief observations about some of the major
branches of science, such as chemistry and biology, and how they developed
during the time in question. These remarks should help to illustrate the ways in
which the various branches of science changed and developed within the broad
Newtonian framework. We will begin with the development of modern
chemistry.
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

180

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Chemistry
The beginning of modern chemistry is generally dated to the late 1700s, with the
work of Antoine Lavoisier (1743–94). To understand why this is, it is helpful to
look at chemistry before the 1600s.
When we think of chemistry today, we tend to think of a largely quantitative
discipline. If you have taken a high-school or college-level chemistry class with a
laboratory component, you no doubt have experience with this quantitative
aspect of chemistry. Lab work today generally involves careful measurements of
weight, volume, temperature, and so on. In short, chemistry today is largely a
quantitative discipline.
Not so before the 1600s. In contrast, chemistry was largely viewed as a
qualitative discipline. That is, a chemist was primarily concerned with qualitative
changes – changes in color, for example. One of the well-known goals of the
alchemists, of turning lead into gold, will serve to illustrate. Lead and gold are,
qualitatively speaking, fairly similar. Both are dense, highly malleable metals. In
fact, the main qualitative difference between lead and gold is color – lead is dull
grey, whereas gold is a shiny yellowish color.
If one can make a relatively small qualitative change in lead – in particular,
introduce into lead the qualitative yellowish color of gold – then the result (at
least given the existing view) should be gold. Note that ﬁre usually has a strong
yellowish color, and so it makes sense to think that the elements involved in ﬁre
were associated with yellowness. So perhaps we can use ﬁre to transfer the yellow
quality to lead, thereby converting lead to gold.
This is a very simpliﬁed account of some of the theories and activities of the
alchemists, but the key idea is to note the qualitative emphasis. Incidentally, the
alchemists’ approach may seem a rather primitive approach to chemistry, at least
by modern standards. But given the framework of the time, their approach made
perfectly good sense. (Newton, among many others, did an enormous amount of
alchemical research). Our best current science will probably also seem primitive
by the standards in place, say, 500 years from now. You do the best you can with
the state of knowledge at the time in which you live.
At any rate, the qualitative approach to chemistry changed dramatically in the
late 1700s. Antoine Lavoisier began to do extensive chemical investigations using
the weight balance as a central laboratory tool. In doing so, he proposed new views
that were better at explanation and prediction than the existing theories, and soon
his quantitative approach began to dominate chemistry.
By the early 1800s, chemists were able to specify a number of quantitative laws.
For example, at this time John Dalton (1766–1844) formulated his atomic theory,
which was very much in the Newtonian framework. Dalton argued that the
behavior of gases could best be understood as resulting from particles interacting
under a repulsive force. Note the similarities between this approach and the
Newtonian approach. Newton explained the behavior of, for example, the planets
as resulting from those bodies being under the inﬂuence of forces. Dalton,
likewise, is explaining the behavior of gases as fundamentally being a matter
of objects and forces acting on those objects.
These interactions could be (and were) characterized by quantitative laws, and
eventually these laws could be presented mathematically. Here we see chemistry

22 The Development of the Newtonian Worldview, 1700–1900

being subsumed under the distinctive Newtonian approach, involving bodies
under the inﬂuence of forces, with the forces characterized mathematically.
Eventually, during the 1800s and into the 1900s, the Newtonian approach to
chemistry would be so productive that branches of chemistry would shade off into
branches of physics, such that physics and chemistry are no longer entirely
separate disciplines, but rather, different levels at which to investigate the world.
And the world being investigated, whether through chemistry or physics, was
conceived of as very much a Newtonian world, one of bodies under the inﬂuence
of forces describable through precise mathematical laws.
Biology
Biology also achieved its modern form in the time in question. Biology is a
somewhat broader subject, and, notably, very important work was done in the
1500s and 1600s. But it was in the 1700s and 1800s that it became clear that
biological phenomena were not isolated from the Newtonian view of the universe.
One way to illustrate this concisely is by a brief consideration of the issues at stake
between biological vitalists, on the one hand, and biological mechanists, on the
other. The vitalist view was that living substances were different from nonliving
substances, and hence the laws (such as Newtonian laws) that apply to nonliving
objects do not necessarily apply to living objects. On an intuitive level, the vitalist
view is easy to understand. Look, for example, at your arm, and compare your arm
to, say, a rock. On the face of it, the two seem very different. And in general, living
things seem very different from nonliving things, and so it is far from clear whether
life could be explained with the same laws that explain nonliving things.
However, work begun in the 1700s, and continuing into the 1800s and 1900s,
made it clear that the vitalist view is mistaken. This work involved a number of
areas and a number of researchers. Below we will look only brieﬂy at a few
examples, but they should be sufﬁcient to give a good idea of the kinds of results
that would establish that biological phenomena are not different in kind than
phenomena outside of biology.
First, consider some discoveries concerning the structure and function of
nerves. Investigations into nerves, including dissection of nerve ﬁbers and the
recognition of the distinction between motor and sensory nerves, date back at
least to 500 BCE. Nerve ﬁbers were long thought to be pipes or channels for the
ﬂow of the vital ﬂuid or vital force that was believed necessary for life, and this
view of nerve ﬁbers ﬁt in well with the vitalist position. But in the late 1700s, Luigi
Galvani (1737–98) began a series of experiments showing that electrical currents
would cause contractions in the muscles of a frog’s legs. Galvani’s work was soon
continued and extended by Alessandro Volta (1745–1827). As a result of the work
of Galvani and Volta (and a number of others as well), it was soon established that
nerve conduction is an electrical phenomenon, which is a quite different view of
nerves than the old view of nerves as pipes or channels for the vital ﬂuid or force.
As work continued in the 1800s, the physical and chemical basis of the
electrical activity associated with nerves would come to be well understood.
For our purposes, the key point is that what was originally viewed as a purely
biological phenomena, and one that ﬁt well within the vitalist view, is now

181

182

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

understood to be, at bottom, an electrical phenomenon resulting from physical
and chemical processes not different in kind from those found outside of biology.
And so this area of biology is seen, at bottom, to ﬁt in well with the overall
mechanistic, Newtonian understanding of physical and chemical processes.
As a second brief example, consider the early years of organic chemistry. Before
the early 1800s, the standard view was that what would come to be called
“organic” compounds could only be produced by living organisms. Moreover,
organic chemistry was originally viewed as closely tied to vitalism, in that the vital
ﬂuid or vital force believed necessary for life was generally viewed as required to
produce organic compounds. And for a number of years, this seemed to be a
reasonable view, supported in large part by the fact that no one was successful in
producing organic compounds other than by means involving living organisms.
However, in 1828 Friedrich Wohler (1800–82) managed to produce urea,
which is clearly an organic compound, from an inorganic compound. Chemists
were soon able to produce other organic compounds from inorganic ones,
including increasingly complex organic compounds. By the mid-1850s this
feat became routine, and this too substantially undermined the vitalist view of
the sharp distinction between living and nonliving things.
A ﬁnal example involves work in evolutionary theory, largely in the early to mid­
1800s. The end result would be that life in general, for example the variety of species,
would be seen to be the result of natural processes operating according to natural
laws. Darwin himself was deliberately working within a Newtonian approach. Much
as Newton’s laws of motion govern the behavior of objects over time (moving
planets, falling objects, and the like), Darwin wanted to ﬁnd laws governing changes
in species over time. Parts of the story of the development of evolutionary theory will
be taken up in detail in Part III of this book. So for now we will just summarize by
noting how Darwin’s approach nicely illustrates how much of an inﬂuence
Newton’s science, and the relatively new Newtonian worldview, was having on
other branches of science. Newton’s approach – of looking for precisely speciﬁable
laws governing the behavior of whatever it was the particular science was investi­
gating – had come to be seen as the proper way to do science.
This is again a very brief sketch of these developments, but it illustrates the
sorts of major advances that were made in biology in the period from roughly
1700 to 1900. And, importantly, these examples illustrate how biological phe­
nomena came to be viewed, at bottom, as no different from nonbiological
phenomena. Although there were still a few defenders of vitalism even into
the early 1900s, by this time it was pretty clear that the mechanist view was
correct. Discoveries in the twentieth century, for example in genetics, sealed the
case, and provided a good understanding of how living phenomena arise from
molecular-level events. In general, by the early twentieth century, biology,
chemistry, and physics were united, and came to be viewed as investigating
the same Newtonian world, although at different levels.
Electromagnetic theory
One ﬁnal example will sufﬁce to illustrate the ways in which various phenomena
were brought under the Newtonian framework. Phenomena involving electricity

22 The Development of the Newtonian Worldview, 1700–1900

and magnetism had been studied at least since the ancient Greeks, but the 1700s
and 1800s saw the most dramatic advances in our understanding of such
phenomena.
In the mid-1700s, Benjamin Franklin (1706–90) demonstrated that lightning
was an electrical phenomenon, and demonstrated as well a number of interesting
connections between electrical and magnetic phenomena. Then in the late 1700s
and early 1800s, researchers such as Charles Coulomb (1736–1806) and Michael
Faraday (1791–1867), and of course a number of others, made major advances in
our understanding of electricity and magnetism. Coulomb, for example, discov­
ered an inverse square law governing magnetic and electrical repulsions and
attractions, in which the strength of electrical or magnetic attraction or repulsion
between two bodies is inversely proportional to the square of the distance
between the bodies.
It is worth noting that the “inverse square” nature of Coulomb’s law is quite
similar to the inverse square nature of Newton’s account of gravity. Recall that, on
Newton’s account of gravity, the strength of the gravitational attraction between
two bodies is inversely proportional to the square of the distances between the
bodies. So too with Coulomb’s law, and in this way, Coulomb’s law is very much in
the Newtonian spirit. More generally, notice the change in the overall approach to
electrical and magnetic phenomena. For most of our history, going back at least to
the ancient Greeks, electrical and magnetic phenomena were described in a
qualitative way. Now, though, such phenomena are coming to be viewed as
governed by precise, mathematical laws, much in the spirit of Newton’s approach.
In the ﬁrst half of the 1800s, Faraday discovered yet more connections between
electrical and magnetic phenomena. By far his most inﬂuential discovery, in
practical terms, was that a magnetic ﬁeld could induce an electric current. This is
the basic principle that still underlies the production of electricity today – that is,
the considerable amount of electricity we all use each day results, essentially, from
Faraday’s discovery.
Although this may have been, in practical terms, his most inﬂuential discovery,
his suggestion that electricity, magnetism, and light might be aspects of the same
underlying source would have substantial theoretical inﬂuence (though this idea
would soon come to have countless practical applications as well). This sugges­
tion of Faraday’s – that electricity, magnetism, and light are in some sense
different aspects of the same underlying phenomena – would soon be developed
into the electromagnetic theory put forth by James Clerk Maxwell (1831–79) in
the mid-1800s. Whereas Faraday’s discoveries had been described in a largely
qualitative way, Maxwell would discover the fundamental mathematical equa­
tions underlying and uniting phenomena involving light, electricity, and magnet­
ism. These equations – generally termed Maxwell’s equations – are widely
considered to be the most important discoveries of this period.
Once again, this is a very brief and selective overview of some of the key
developments concerning electricity, magnetism, and light. But note again the
same general pattern: this was a period of extraordinary advances in these areas,
and phenomena that were once seen as distinct, and that were approached
qualitatively, have now been uniﬁed and treated in the quantitative, mathematical
manner fundamental to the Newtonian approach.

183

184

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

General comments
Although we have looked speciﬁcally at only three areas of science, these should
give an idea of the ways in which various branches of science came under the
Newtonian umbrella during the period from 1700 to 1900. Notably, this was a
200-year period of impressive accomplishments and discoveries in a wide range of
sciences. In general, by 1900 the various branches of science were making rapid
advances. The overall Newtonian approach was proving extraordinarily produc­
tive. By about 1900, the sense was that we were close to a complete understanding
of nature, and that only a few reasonably minor problems remained to be worked
out. Let’s turn now to some of these problems.

Minor Clouds
In an oft-quoted phrase from a talk given in 1900, Lord Kelvin, one of the leading
British physicists, noted that there were only a few “minor clouds” in the
otherwise brilliant sky of modern science. The two main clouds Kelvin was
referring to were, on the one hand, the results of the Michelson–Morley experi­
ment, and on the other hand, some problems understanding black body radiation.
As it turns out, understanding the results of the Michelson–Morley experiment
would require the development of Einstein’s theory of relativity, whereas under­
standing the issues involved with black body radiation, as well as the other issues
discussed below, would require the development of quantum theory. These
theories are two of the most important branches of modern physics, and both
have nontrivial implications for Newtonian science and aspects of the Newtonian
worldview. In light of this, Kelvin’s minor clouds turned out to be anything but
minor. In the remainder of this chapter, we will brieﬂy look at the Michelson–
Morley experiment, at issues involved with black body radiation, and at other
seemingly minor issues as well. In subsequent chapters we will explore relativity
theory and quantum theory, with an eye toward the implications these theories
have for the Newtonian worldview.
The Michelson–Morley experiment
The Michelson–Morley experiment involved the speed of light, and the means by
which light moves. Albert Michelson (1852–1931) and Edward Morley (1838–1923)
performed a number of experiments involving these issues, the most crucial of which
were in the late 1880s. Some background information will help.
Consider the movement of water waves. Such waves are the result of the
mechanical interactions of the medium through which such waves move, namely,
water. And of course, one cannot have movement of water waves without the
presence of the underlying medium, namely, water.
Likewise for sound waves. Sound waves result from the mechanical interaction
of the medium through which such waves travel. Air is the typical medium,
though sound waves will travel through a variety of other mediums as well. And
again, the underlying medium is necessary for the transmission of sound waves:
no underlying medium, no waves.

22 The Development of the Newtonian Worldview, 1700–1900

In general, in keeping with the general Newtonian outlook, the movement of
any wave was believed to require the mechanical interactions of an underlying
medium. So if light is a wave – as there was good evidence to think it was – then
given this Newtonian framework, the movement of light should require the
presence of an underlying medium. The situation is nicely summed up in the
following passage on light from Deschanel’s Natural Philosophy, which was a
standard physics textbook from the late 1800s. (Before the word “science” became
standard, “natural philosophy” was the term used for what we would call science.
Incidentally, the publication date of Deschanel’s text is just prior to the Michelson–Morley experiment, which would raise substantial problems for this New­
tonian view of the transmission of light.)
Light, like sound, is believed to consist in vibration; but it does not, like
sound, require the presence of air or other gross matter to enable its
vibrations to be propagated from the source to the percipient. . . . It seems
necessary to assume the existence of a medium far more subtle than
ordinary matter . . . [that is] capable of transmitting vibrations with a
velocity enormously transcending that of sound. . . . This hypothetical
medium is called aether. (Deschanel 1885, p. 947)
The origin of the name “ether” is tied to the ether of old, that is, the ether from
the Aristotelian worldview that was thought to be the element found in the
superlunar region. But besides the name, there is little similarity between the
Aristotelian ether and the medium thought to underlie the transmission of light.
(Incidentally, I will continue to spell it “ether”; Deschanel’s spelling, with the “a,” is
another common spelling.)
Note how this view of the transmission of light ﬁts into the Newtonian
picture of a mechanical universe. Light, like other phenomena such as sound
and water waves, was thought to need the mechanical interactions of an
underlying medium. The Michelson–Morley experiment was designed to
provide more direct evidence for the existence of the ether. The idea was to
send two beams of light out and back (reﬂected from a mirror) in two
directions, at 90-degree angles to each other. If light travels through a medium
such as the ether, then given the fact that the Earth is presumably moving
through this ether something like the way a boat moves through water, we
would expect the two beams to return at slightly different times. The key idea is
similar to sending two swimmers out from a moving boat. Consider Figure 22.1,
illustrating the analogy with boats and swimmers. Suppose all three boats are
traveling through the water at the same rate, let’s say 1 mile per hour, and that
B1 and B2 are the same distance away from B3. Suppose the two swimmers
move through the water at the same rate, let’s say 3 miles per hour. One
swimmer’s job (S1 in the diagram) is to swim out to the top boat (B1), and then
return to the original boat (B3). Because of the movement of the boats through
the water, this swimmer will have to swim at an angle toward the top boat, and
again swim at an angle on the return to the original boat. The other swimmer’s
task (S2 in the diagram) is to catch up to the boat (B2) that is ahead of the
original boat, and then return to the original boat.

185

186

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

Figure 22.1 Boat and swimmer analogy.

Relative to the original boat B3, both swimmers are swimming the same
distance out and back. But note that, relative to the medium through which
they are swimming (that is, the water), they are swimming different distances. In
particular, S1 will swim a somewhat shorter distance, with respect to the water,
than S2. (If you are interested, you can use the Pythagorean theorem, together
with some algebra, to ﬁgure out the exact distances each person swims.) Since the
two swimmers are swimming different distances relative to the medium through
which they are moving, they will return to the original boat at different times, as
illustrated in Figure 22.2.
The idea behind the Michelson–Morley experiment is exactly analogous to the
boat and swimmer analogy. In the experiment, Michelson and Morley sent two
beams of light out from a ﬁxed location, and this location is analogous to the boat B3
from which the swimmers were sent out. The two beams of light were sent out at
right angles to one another, and these light beams are analogous to the swimmers S1
and S2. The beams of light were reﬂected off two mirrors at equal distances from the
light source, and these mirrors are analogous to the boats B1 and B2.
If the Newtonian, mechanical view of the transmission of light is correct, in
which light is propagated through the medium of the ether, then the light source
and mirrors should be moving through the ether. This is because the light source
and mirrors are themselves attached to the Earth, and the Earth, in its movement
around the sun, will be moving through the ether. The ether, then, is analogous to
the water in the boat and swimmer analogy. Although the light beams are moving
the same distance relative to the light source, since the light source and mirrors
are moving through the ether, the two beams of light would have to travel
different distances through the ether (for the exact same reason the two
swimmers travel different distances through the medium through which they

22 The Development of the Newtonian Worldview, 1700–1900

Figure 22.2 The swimmers return at different times.

are swimming). So, we would expect the two beams of light to return to the light
source at slightly different times.
However, contrary to everyone’s expectations, the light always returned at
exactly the same time. This result was very surprising, and, as is proper in such
cases, the experiment was repeated and veriﬁed numerous times. But the result
was always the same – the light always returned at exactly the same time.
Notice how this ﬁts the pattern of disconﬁrmation reasoning discussed in
Chapter 4: if the Newtonian, mechanical picture of the transmission of light is
correct, then the beams of light should return at different times. But they do not.
So something is amiss.
Given the success of the Newtonian framework, it would not have been
reasonable for scientists to reject the Newtonian view as a result of this one
experiment. But something was not right, and as Lord Kelvin noted, the results of
the Michelson–Morley experiment seemed to be one of the few clouds in an
otherwise clear sky. As it turns out, these sorts of issues involving light turn out
not to be minor at all, and, as noted, Einstein’s relativity would eventually be
required to solve these problems. And as we will see, relativity theory itself will
have some interesting implications for our usual view of the universe. We will
discuss that in the next chapter, but before doing so, we will brieﬂy look at a few of
the other seemingly minor clouds.
Black body radiation
Without going into too much detail, let me give a sketch of the problem with black
body radiation. Black body is a technical term used in physics for an idealized
object that absorbs all electromagnetic radiation directed toward it. For example,
light is a form of electromagnetic radiation, so if we shine a light on a black body, it

187

188

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

will absorb all the light, and so appear black (hence the name “black body”). In
everyday life we do not come across such idealized objects, but we do have regular
experience with black bodies that, while not quite the idealized black bodies of
physics, will help illustrate the problem.
For example, consider a black coil burner on an electric stove. Such an object
absorbs most of the light that hits it, and so it appears (mostly) black. Moreover,
when heated, such an object will give off radiation. A coil burner on an electric
stove, for example, will give off radiation both in the form of heat and also in the
form of light (for example, when hot enough, the burner will glow red). And we
can, of course, measure the pattern of radiation emitted by the coil.
An idealized black body, when heated, should also emit radiation. And given
the developments in the Newtonian picture, as that picture developed during the
1700s and 1800s, one would expect a heated black body to give off a particular
pattern of radiation. In fact, there were well-established equations, much in the
quantitative Newtonian tradition, that should predict quite accurately the pattern
of radiation we would expect from a heated black body. At the very end of the
1800s, and in the early 1900s, physicists were able to construct devices that should
have emitted the pattern of radiation one would expect of a heated black body.
However, the observed pattern of radiation emitted differed in important ways
from that predicted from the Newtonian-based picture of radiation. In a nutshell,
the situation was this: when looking just at the longer wavelengths of radiation
emitted, the observed pattern of radiation matched closely the predicted pattern.
But at short wavelengths, the observed pattern of radiation was nowhere close to
what was predicted. (Incidentally, these problematic shorter wavelengths are in
the ultraviolet end of the electromagnetic spectrum, and hence this problem is
sometimes referred to as the “ultraviolet catastrophe.”)
The situation is analogous to that of the Michelson–Morley experiment, and is
again a case of disconﬁrming evidence: given the existing view of radiation, a view
very much in the Newtonian framework, one would expect certain experimental
results. But in the case of black body radiation, those expected results are not
observed. So in this case, as with the Michelson–Morley experiment, something
seems to be amiss with the Newtonian picture.
Again, one certainly does not throw out an otherwise successful theory, much
less the otherwise quite successful Newtonian framework, because of a relatively
small number of problems. Nonetheless, the problem of black body radiation was
another of the seemingly minor clouds.
It would eventually take quantum theory to handle the problem of black body
radiation. As we will see in subsequent chapters, quantum theory has substantial
implications for many of our assumptions about the world, and, in particular, it
has substantial implications for important pieces of the Newtonian worldview. So
as with the case of the Michelson–Morley experiment, the problem of black body
radiation turns out to be more than merely a minor cloud.
Other issues
Although the results of the Michelson–Morley experiment and the problem of
black body radiation were the two most substantial of the minor clouds referred to

22 The Development of the Newtonian Worldview, 1700–1900

by Lord Kelvin, there were a few other puzzling issues at the beginning of the
twentieth century. Before closing this chapter, a brief mention of some of these
issues is in order.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, physicists realized that the light
emitted from heated elements had unexpected patterns. For example, suppose we
heat a sample of sodium. We will notice that it gives off a yellowish light (table salt
contains sodium, and you can get a sense of this effect simply by heating a small
amount of salt). This by itself is not problematic – it has long been known that
some substances emit characteristic types of light when heated. What was
surprising was that, in the early twentieth century, physicists realized that the
light emitted by, say, heated sodium, consists of only certain very speciﬁc
wavelengths of light. (As it turns out, the pattern of wavelengths emitted by
an element is unique to that element, and this fact has proven to be enormously
useful in determining the makeup of unknown substances, as well as determining
the composition of distant stars.) This very speciﬁc pattern of wavelengths
emitted by heated elements, and, in particular, the fact that the light consists
of only these speciﬁc wavelengths, was surprising. On the Newtonian-based view,
one would expect the light emitted to consist of a continuous range of wave­
lengths, rather than being restricted to a few discrete wavelengths.
So again we have a case of disconﬁrming evidence for the Newtonian picture,
although again, this seemed at the time to be a relatively minor problem.
However, this too turned out to be a case that would only be resolved with
the development of quantum theory.
During this same time period, at the end of the 1800s and the beginning of the
1900s, a variety of investigations were producing results that did not ﬁt cleanly
into any existing theory. These results were not necessarily direct problems for
the existing theories, but neither was there an existing framework into which to
place these results. A few examples will serve to illustrate these sorts of issues.
At the end of the 1800s and in the early 1900s, there was no shortage of
physicists, some quite prominent, investigating what were typically called “cath­
ode rays.” We now understand cathode rays to be essentially a stream of electrons,
but, at the time, the results from these researchers were often conﬂicting and, as
mentioned, there was no overall framework into which to place them. So again,
these results did not directly conﬂict with the existing general views, but they were
somewhat puzzling.
At about the same time, what came to be called X-rays were discovered. We
now view X-rays as a type of electromagnetic radiation, similar to visible light but
of much shorter wavelength. As with cathode rays, many of the early results were
puzzling. To cite just one example, some experiments suggested that X-rays had
to be particles, but other experiments suggested equally strongly that they could
not be particles, but instead had to be waves. So at the time, although many of the
properties of X-rays were being discovered, there was no good understanding of
what X-rays were, and, like cathode rays, they did not ﬁt into any overall picture.
To take just one more example, this was also the time of the discovery of
radioactivity, with research including, among other work, the important discov­
eries of Marie Curie (1867–1935) and Pierre Curie (1859–1906). (Marie Curie
was the ﬁrst woman to win a Nobel Prize in science, as well as the ﬁrst person to

189

190

Transition to the Newtonian Worldview

win two Nobel Prizes). Once again, the properties of radioactive elements proved
puzzling. And as with the examples mentioned above, although radioactivity did
not directly conﬂict with the generally accepted Newtonian view, the discoveries
surrounding radioactivity did not ﬁt cleanly into this framework.
The cases discussed above are by no means a complete list of the active areas of
research in physics at the beginning of the twentieth century, nor is it a complete
account of areas with puzzling results. But these examples should be sufﬁcient to
give a sense of the types of results that, while not directly conﬂicting with the
overall Newtonian view, nonetheless did not ﬁt easily into that view.

Concluding Remarks
The period from 1700 to 1900 was a remarkably productive one, in which the
framework supplied by those working in the 1600s, most notably Newton’s
contribution, was ﬁlled out in a very promising way. All the pieces seemed to
be falling together beautifully, and the result was a Newtonian view of the universe
in which almost everything seemed to be explained, or at least was expected to
soon be explained.
In the section immediately above, we discussed two of the most prominent
problems at the end of the 1800s, the problem of the Michelson–Morley results
and the problem of black body radiation. We also looked brieﬂy at a few other
puzzling results from this time period. At the time, it was expected that the results
of the Michelson–Morley experiment, and the problem of black body radiation,
would eventually be resolved within an overall Newtonian framework. Likewise
for the puzzling results discussed at the very end of the preceding section.
But as it happened, these results turned out to be more than just minor
problems for the Newtonian view. In the remaining chapters we will look at
developments in recent times, largely from the twentieth century. Two of these
major developments – relativity theory and quantum theory – would eventually
be able to account for the curious results of the Michelson–Morley experiment
and the problem of black body radiation. The other major recent development is
evolutionary theory, and we will explore it as well in the next part of the book. As
we will see, all of these new developments have substantial implications for views
we have had since at least the beginnings of the Newtonian period.

191

Part III
Recent Developments In Science and Worldviews
In Part III, we explore Einstein’s theory of relativity, quantum theory, and
evolutionary theory. All of these theories require substantial changes in our
worldview. As occurred in the 1600s, we will see that some of the beliefs we have
long taken as obvious empirical facts turn out, in light of recent developments, to
be incorrect philosophical/conceptual facts. And having seen, in Part II, the
changes required by new discoveries in the 1600s, we now see that recent
developments require changes in our own view of the world.

Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

193

23
The Special Theory of Relativity
In the previous chapter, we saw how the Newtonian view developed quite nicely
during the two centuries following the publication of Newton’s Principia, and
that, by 1900, there were only a few seemingly minor issues that did not quite ﬁt
the Newtonian picture. One of these issues, the results of the Michelson–Morley
experiment, would not be resolved until the development of relativity theory in
the early 1900s. Our main goal in this chapter will be to understand the main
aspects of the special theory of relativity. In the next chapter we will explore the
general theory of relativity.
Albert Einstein (1879–1955) published the special theory of relativity in 1905
and, as the name suggests, the theory is not completely general, but rather is
applicable so long as certain special circumstances apply. In 1916 he published the
general theory of relativity, which, again as the name suggests, is a completely
general theory, not restricted to the circumstances required in order to use the
(much simpler) special theory.
Earlier in the book, we spent some time exploring some of the mistaken
philosophical/conceptual facts of the Aristotelian worldview, especially the
perfect circle and uniform motion facts. In this chapter, we look for the ﬁrst
time at some of our own beliefs that we have long taken as obvious empirical facts
but that turn out, in light of relativity theory, to be mistaken philosophical/
conceptual facts. We will begin with a brief discussion of two such beliefs.

Absolute Space and Absolute Time
The two main philosophical/conceptual facts in question involve what are
commonly referred to as absolute space and absolute time. These beliefs about
space and time are very commonsensical – most people take them as obvious
empirical facts about space and time. We will begin with an example to help
illustrate some issues involved with the notion of absolute space.
Suppose on a table before us we have some medium-sized object, say, a solid
metal rod. And suppose we get out a trustworthy ruler, lay it alongside the rod,
and determine that the rod is exactly 1 meter in length. This fact, that the rod is 1
meter long, is as clear an example of an empirical fact as we can have. We have
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

194

Recent Developments

direct, straightforward empirical evidence that the rod is indeed 1 meter long. So
far, so good.
Now suppose we get a second more or less identical rod, and lay the second rod
next to the ﬁrst, and assure ourselves that the two rods are the same length, that is,
1 meter long. Now suppose I tie a string to this second rod, and begin twirling it
rapidly over my head. So here I am, string in hand, twirling this metal rod over my
head as fast as I can. Suppose I now ask you this question: As I am twirling the rod
about, how long is the rod?
I suspect your natural inclination is to say that the rod is the same length as
before, 1 meter long. This is a perfectly reasonable response, but notice that this
belief, that the rod is still the same length as the rod on the table, 1 meter long, is
not a straightforward empirical fact. Notice you have no way of directly measuring
the rod as it is spinning about my head. So whatever the source of your belief that
the rod is one meter long, it cannot be based on direct empirical evidence.
I suspect your belief that the rod that is in motion continues to be 1 meter long
is based on these two factors: (a) your belief from a moment ago, based on direct
empirical evidence, that the rod was 1 meter long, and (b) your belief that space is
absolute, that is, that space does not shrink or enlarge as a result of motion (and so
the distance between the ends of a rigid object such as the metal rod does not
shrink or enlarge simply because that object happens to be in motion).
This latter belief, that distances do not change as a result of motion, is one way
of phrasing the concept of absolute space. The key idea is that space is space – 1
meter is 1 meter, regardless of one’s point of view, or whether one is sitting at a
desk or moving about the Earth at high speeds on a mission in space. And again,
this notion – that space, for example the amount of space between the ends of the
metal rod, does not change simply as a result of motion – is what I will have in
mind when I speak of absolute space. (It is worth mentioning that “absolute space”
and “absolute time” as well are sometimes used in a somewhat different sense, to
refer to what are often called substantivalist versus relational views of space and
time. I do not discuss the debate between advocates of substantivalist and
relational views in the body of this chapter, but a brief discussion of the distinction
can be found in the Chapter Notes at the end of the book.)
As we will see below, relativity theory challenges this commonsensical belief
about space. Before discussing relativity, however, we will ﬁrst consider absolute
time. And again, we will begin with an example.
Suppose we know John and Joe are identical twins, and suppose they were born
at the exact same moment. Having twins being born at the exact same moment
would be difﬁcult (but not impossible, for example, if born by Caesarean section),
but for now suppose we ignore this difﬁculty and accept that the two were born at
the exact same time. Suppose also that you have never met Joe. Now suppose I tell
you that John and Joe are normal, healthy individuals, and that John is 20 years
old. And this time my question to you is this: Given that John and Joe are twins,
and John is 20 years old, how old is Joe?
Again, I suspect your natural inclination is to say that Joe is also 20 years old.
Again this is perfectly reasonable, but again note that your belief cannot be based
entirely on direct empirical evidence. After all, you have never even met Joe, so
you have little if any direct observational evidence about him. I suspect your belief

23 The Special Theory of Relativity

that Joe is 20 years old is based on (a) your belief that John and Joe are twins and
John is 20 years old, and (b) your belief that time is absolute, that is, that the
amount of time that passes is the same everywhere (and so when 20 years have
passed for John, 20 years must also have passed for Joe).
This latter belief, that the amount of time that passes is the same everywhere, is
one way of phrasing the idea of absolute time. The idea is that time is time: the
amount of time that passes is absolute, the same for everyone and everywhere.
As with the idea of absolute space, relativity theory also challenges this notion
of absolute time. With this background material in mind, we will now move on to
look at the special theory of relativity, and then later return to make clear the
implications relativity theory has for our concepts of space and time.

Overview of the Special Theory of Relativity
Some aspects of special relativity are unusual, but the theory itself is not
particularly difﬁcult. In contrast, the general theory of relativity is appreciably
more difﬁcult. In this chapter, unless otherwise speciﬁed, when I speak of
relativity theory I will always have in mind the special theory of relativity.
Then as noted, we will turn to the general theory in the next chapter.
As is often the case, it is helpful to begin with a picture. Suppose Joe is standing
on the ground, and (speaking from Joe’s perspective – in a moment we will
consider Sara’s perspective), Sara is ﬂying by overhead. The consequences of
relativity are most dramatic when high speeds are involved, so let’s imagine the
speed involved is quite high, say, 180,000 kilometers per second (this is much
faster than any person can travel with current technology). To illustrate the
consequences to space and time, it will be helpful to have Sara and Joe each have
clocks separated by some particular distance. Let’s suppose Sara has two clocks,
which we will call SC1 (for “Sara’s Clock 1”) and SC2. Suppose that, when Sara
measures the distance between those clocks, she ﬁnds them to be separated by 50
kilometers. We will write this as “50 (s) km”, using the “(s)” to indicate that this is
the distance Sara measures. We will suppose also that Joe has two clocks, JC1 and
JC2, which he measures as 1,000 kilometers apart. Figure 23.1 summarizes the
situation.
In a moment we will use this illustration to explore the implications of special
relativity. But ﬁrst, it will help to understand the two basic principles that lead to
these implications. The ﬁrst is the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light.
Principle of the Constancy of the Velocity of Light (PCVL): The speed of light
in a vacuum will always be measured to be the same.
For example, if Joe and Sara measure the speed of light in a vacuum, they will
both arrive at the same result. The speed of light in a vacuum is approximately
3.0 × 108 meters per second, or 300,000 kilometers per second. Incidentally, the
speed of light is generally represented by “c.” So Sara and Joe, if they measure c,
the speed of light, will both measure light to be traveling at 300,000 kilometers per
second.

195

196

Recent Developments

Figure 23.1 Illustration for special relativity.

Notice that, if the PCVL is correct, then light behaves very differently than
typical objects. For example, suppose Sara and Joe measure the speed of a moving
baseball rather than the speed of light. Suppose Sara shoots a baseball forward,
that is, in Figure 23.1, she shoots the ball straight ahead of herself toward the right
side of the illustration. Suppose that, from her point of view, she shoots the ball at
100 kilometers per second. In this case, when Sara measures the speed of the
baseball, she will measure it to be moving at 100 kilometers per second.
But from Joe’s perspective, the speed of the baseball is a combination of the
speed at which it is shot forward (100 km/s) plus the speed at which Sara is
moving (180,000 km/s). So when he measures the speed of the moving ball, he will
measure the ball to be moving at 180,100 kilometers per second.
But if the PCVL is correct, then light does not behave like the baseball. For
example, if Sara turns on a ﬂashlight while she is above Joe, then when Sara and
Joe measure the speed at which the leading edge of the beam of light is traveling,
they will both measure it to be going exactly the same speed – 300,000 kilometers
per second. In short, if the PCVL is correct, then light behaves very differently
than, say, a moving baseball.
Again, the PCVL is one of the basic principles on which the special theory of
relativity is based. The other is generally called the principle of relativity (be
careful not to confuse the principle of relativity with the theory of relativity).
Roughly speaking, the principle of relativity is as follows.
The Principle of Relativity (rough version): There is no privileged point of
view from which to say who is in motion and who is at rest.
For example, in the scenario pictured in Figure 23.1, Joe is perfectly entitled to
consider himself to be at rest and Sara to be in motion. But if the principle of

23 The Special Theory of Relativity

relativity is correct (and there is good reason to think it is), then Sara is equally
entitled to consider herself at rest and Joe to be in motion.
As noted, this is a somewhat rough version of the principle of relativity. A more
careful formulation is as follows.
Principle of Relativity (more careful version): If two observers are in identical
laboratories, except that the labs are moving in straight lines with uniform
speed (that is, neither speeding up nor slowing down) with respect to each
another, and if identical experiments are carried out in the two labs, then the
results of the experiments will be identical.
For example, in the situation pictured in Figure 23.1, Sara and Joe are moving in
a straight line with uniform velocity relative to one another. So if the principle of
relativity is correct, any experimental result Sara achieves can be matched by Joe,
and any result Joe gets can be matched by Sara.
Importantly, if the principle of relativity is correct, then there is no experimental
difference between two labs moving relative to one another in a straight line at
constant speed. So in the case of Sara and Joe above, there can be no empirical
grounds for saying that one of them is “really” at rest while the other is “really” in
motion. Take a moment to appreciate the importance of this fact: if the principle of
relativity is correct, then there can be no empirical grounds – none whatsoever – for
saying that either Sara or Joe is really at rest and the other is really in motion.
In Einstein’s 1905 paper “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies,” in which
he ﬁrst presented what is now commonly referred to as the special theory of
relativity, he put forth the principle of relativity and the principle of the constancy
of the velocity of light as “postulates.” That is, he essentially took these principles
as givens, and showed that a consistent theory (the special theory of relativity)
followed from them. Einstein then showed that this new theory could account for
certain problematic issues that arose when applying Maxwell’s electromagnetic
theory (discussed in the previous chapter) to moving bodies. (This is why the title
of the paper focuses on the electrodynamics of moving bodies, rather than making
any mention of a new theory of relativity.)
But although the principle of relativity and the PCVL are treated as postulates in
his original paper, they are quite plausible principles. For example, experiments such
as the Michelson–Morley experiment (discussed in the previous chapter), as well as
a number of similar experiments in which the speed of light always turned out to be
the same no matter what the circumstances, suggest a principle such as the PCVL. In
fact, Einstein makes note of such experiments when introducing the PCVL (it is not
clear whether Einstein was speciﬁcally familiar with the Michelson–Morley experi­
ment itself, though he was certainly familiar with other similar experiments).
Likewise, the principle of relativity is a plausible principle. Consider again the
example of Joe and Sara in Figure 23.1. Given the picture, Joe is on the ground
(presumably, Joe is on the surface of the Earth) and Sara seems to be on some sort
of a ship. Our initial inclination is probably to say that Joe is the one at rest and
Sara is in motion. But notice that this preference for the ground-based point of
view is no doubt a result of the fact that we spend most of our existence on the
ground. Thus, while it may be understandable that we naturally take the ground­

197

198

Recent Developments

based point of view, there surely is nothing special about this point of view. If we
spent most of our time on the surface of Mars, we would naturally take that as our
usual point of view. If we had been born and raised on the moon, we would
naturally take that as our usual point of view. And if we spent most of our lives on
ships such as the one Sara is on, we would naturally take that perspective.
The basic moral is that none of these points of view is special, or in other words,
there is no privileged point of view. There are no grounds for saying that Joe is
really at rest and Sara is really moving, or for saying that Sara is really at rest and
Joe is really moving. All that can be said is that, from Joe’s point of view, Sara is in
motion, and that from Sara’s point of view, Joe is in motion. In short, both the
principle of relativity and the PCVL, although treated as postulates in Einstein’s
original paper, are plausible principles.
If we accept the principle of relativity, then when we speak of motion it must be
understood as relative motion, that is, as motion relative to a point of view. This is
an important point to keep in mind – it is not a problem to speak, say, of people
and objects being in motion, but this must be understood not as absolute motion,
but rather as relative motion, that is, motion from a particular point of view.
To brieﬂy review: the basis of the special theory of relativity is the PCVL and the
principle of relativity. Moreover, both the PCVL and the principle of relativity
seem like plausible principles.
However, accepting the PCVL and the principle of relativity requires accepting
that, for objects in motion, something surprising happens to space and time. In
particular, the PCVL and the principle of relativity together entail the following.
1) Time dilation: Time passes more slowly for people and objects in motion. In
particular, when in motion, time moves more slowly by a factor of
rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2
1
c
This equation is referred to as the Lorentz–Fitzgerald equation.
2) Length contraction: Distances shrink for people and objects in motion. In
particular, when in motion, distances shrink by a factor of
rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2
1
c
(Note this is the same equation as in (1), that is, the Lorentz–Fitzgerald
equation.)
3) The relativity of simultaneity: Events that are simultaneous from a moving
point of view are not simultaneous from a stationary point of view. For
example, suppose that from Sara’s point of view, her two clocks, SC1 and SC2,
are synchronized. From Joe’s point of view, the two clocks are not synchro­
nized. In particular, SC1 will be ahead of SC2 by the amount
0
1
B
C
lv
Brﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
C
@
v2 A
1
c
c2

23 The Special Theory of Relativity

In this equation, l refers to the length between the two clocks. The equation can be
simpliﬁed to the equation
l∗ v
c2
where l∗ refers to the length between the two clocks from the moving point of
view. In what follows, I will use this simpler equation. Also, note that it is the clock
that is in the rear, with respect to the direction of motion, that will be ahead with
respect to time.
It is worth emphasizing that (1), (2), and (3) are deductive consequences of the
PCVL and the principle of relativity. That is, using nothing more than high-school
algebra, it is possible to mathematically derive (1), (2), and (3) from the PCVL and
the principle of relativity. So if the PCVL and the principle of relativity are correct,
then so long as basic mathematics is trustworthy, the effects summarized in (1),
(2), and (3) must also be correct.
To see how (1), (2), and (3) apply, it will be easiest to consider a particular
scenario. So consider again the situation pictured in Figure 23.1. Let’s begin with
what the situation looks like from Joe’s point of view.
From Joe’s point of view, Sara is in motion. Again, time moves more slowly for
people and objects in motion. In particular, from Joe’s point of view, time for Sara
will be moving more slowly by the factor noted in (1) above, that is, by the factor
speciﬁed by the Lorentz–Fitzgerald equation. So, for example, for every 15
minutes that pass on Joe’s clocks, only 15 minutes multiplied by
rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2
1
c
that is, 12 minutes, pass on Sara’s clocks. It is important to appreciate that this is
not a result of any sort of problem with Sara’s clocks, nor is it any sort of illusion
for Joe. When in motion, time moves more slowly. Since, from Joe’s point of view,
Sara is in motion, the amount of time that passes for Sara, and the amount of time
that is measured by her clocks, will be less than the amount of time that passes for
Joe and the amount of time that is measured by his clocks.
Likewise, distances shrink for people and objects in motion. For example,
although Sara measures the distance between her two clocks as 50 kilometers,
from Joe’s point of view, the two clocks are separated by only 50 kilometers
multiplied by
rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2
1
c
that is, 40 kilometers. In short, from Joe’s point of view, Sara’s distances are shorter.
Incidentally, as a detail not yet noted and one I will mention only brieﬂy, it is
worth pointing out that distances shrink by this factor only in the direction of
motion. In this example, the direction of motion is horizontal, so to speak, and so
(from Joe’s point of view) Sara’s distances, in the horizontal direction, shrink by
the factor speciﬁed by the Lorentz–Fitzgerald equation. In the vertical direction,
Sara’s distances do not shrink at all. So in this case, for example, from Joe’s point

199

200

Recent Developments

of view Sara will be skinnier but not shorter. Here are the particulars for those
who are curious: where θ = 0° represents the direction of motion and θ = 90°
represents the direction perpendicular to the direction of motion, distances at an
angle θ between 0° and 90° shrink by a factor of
rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2
1
c
rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2
1 sin2 θ
c
Notice that, where θ = 0° (that is, when dealing with distances in the direction of
motion), this equation reduces to the Lorentz–Fitzgerald equation (thus this
equation, when dealing with distances in the direction of motion, gives the same
result as applying the Lorentz–Fitzgerald equation). Where θ = 90° (that is, when
dealing with distances perpendicular to the direction of motion), this equation
reduces to 1, and hence there is no shrinkage of space when dealing with distances
perpendicular to the direction of motion. Hereafter, we will consider only
examples in which the distances are in the direction of motion, and hence
this detail need not concern us further.
Finally, let us consider (3), the relativity of simultaneity. As noted in (3), events
that are simultaneous from Sara’s point of view will not be simultaneous from
Joe’s point of view. For example, suppose that from Sara’s point of view, her two
clocks are synchronized. Then from Joe’s point of view they will not be synchro­
nized. As noted in (3) above, SC1 will be ahead of SC2 by
l∗ v
 0:0001 seconds:
c2
So from Sara’s point of view, the two clocks read 12:00 noon at the exact same
time. That is, for Sara the event of SC1 reading 12:00 noon and the event of SC2
reading 12:00 noon are simultaneous events. But from Joe’s point of view, this is
not the case. SC1 is 0.0001 seconds ahead of SC2, so when SC1 reads 12:00 noon,
SC2 reads 0.0001 seconds before noon.
Thus far we have described the situation from Joe’s point of view. But recall the
principle of relativity. From Sara’s point of view, she is at rest and Joe is in motion.
So let us look at things from her perspective. From Sara’s point of view, since Joe is
in motion, time is moving more slowly for him by the factor speciﬁed by the
Lorentz–Fitzgerald equation. For example, for every 15 minutes that pass for
Sara, only 12 minutes pass for Joe. Likewise, since Joe is in motion, distances
shrink, so that Joe’s clocks are only 800 kilometers apart. And supposing that,
from Joe’s point of view, JC1 and JC2 are synchronized, they will not be
synchronized from Sara’s point of view. In particular, JC2 will be ahead of JC1 by
l∗ v
 0:002 seconds:
c2
So as mentioned above, if the PCVL and the principle of relativity are correct,
strange things happen to objects in motion. Distances shrink, time moves more
slowly, and events that are simultaneous from one point of view are not
simultaneous from another point of view.

23 The Special Theory of Relativity

The Irresistible Why Question
It is worth emphasizing that the effects of motion on distance, time, and
simultaneity, described above, have been well conﬁrmed by countless experiments.
So there is little question that motion has these surprising effects. Given this, an
almost irresistible question at this point is the Why? question. Why do distances
and time contract for people and objects in motion? Why does whether two events
occur simultaneously depend upon the motion of those observing the events?
What we have just discussed above runs counter to some basic and deeply held
convictions most people have about how space and time behave. If what we have
just discussed is correct – and almost without question it is, as these effects have
been empirically conﬁrmed countless times – why does motion have these
seemingly strange effects on lengths and time? The most accurate answer to
this question is one that, unfortunately, I think most people do not ﬁnd immedi­
ately satisfying. The answer does, though (or at least I think so), grow on you after a
while. The best and most accurate answer to the question of why motion has these
effects on space and time is this: that is simply the type of universe we live in. Our
predecessors discovered, much to their surprise, that they did not inhabit the type
of universe they always thought they had – the universe turned out, for example,
not to be teleological and essentialistic, with heavenly bodies revolving in perfect
circles at uniform speeds. Likewise, we have discovered, much to our surprise, that
we live in a universe in which space and time are not the way most of us have always
thought they were. In other words, much as our predecessors discovered that what
had long been taken to be empirical facts turned out to be mistaken philosophical/
conceptual facts, so too we have discovered that certain common-sense aspects of
our beliefs about space and time, which most of us have long taken to be obvious
empirical facts, have turned out to be mistaken philosophical/conceptual facts.

Is Special Relativity Self-Contradictory?
It might seem that some sort of contradiction must be lurking in relativity theory.
For example, since from Joe’s point of view time is moving more slowly for Sara,
Sara is aging more slowly than Joe. And from Sara’s point of view, Joe is aging
more slowly. Intuitively, it seems that they cannot both be right. For example,
suppose Sara and Joe are twins. Then from Joe’s point of view he is the older twin,
and from Sara’s point of view she is the older twin. According to relativity theory,
they are both right. How can they both be the older twin, unless there is something
contradictory about relativity theory?
The goal of this section is to convince you there is no contradiction in relativity
theory. I have seen no better way to illustrate this point than that used by David
Mermin in his Space and Time in Special Relativity (1968). What follows owes
much to his means of illustrating how there is no contradiction in special relativity.
Consider again the scenario with Sara and Joe. For this illustration, we will only
need Sara to have one clock, so we will omit her second clock. Also, it will be easier
to imagine all the clocks are digital clocks (so we can speak, for example, of a clock
reading “0.00” rather than reading 12:00 noon). I will present two snapshots in

201

202

Recent Developments

time, which I will simply label A and B. As preliminaries, let us suppose the
following are true.






From Joe’s point of view, his two clocks are separated by 1,000 (j) kilometers.
From Joe’s point of view, his two clocks are synchronized.
The speed involved is 180,000 kilometers per second.
At snapshot A (described below), Sara’s clock (SC1) and Joe’s ﬁrst clock (JC1)
both read 0.00.

The ﬁrst snapshot in time, snapshot A, will be as Sara’s clock (SC1) is directly
over Joe’s ﬁrst clock (JC1). Given the background information above, this snap­
shot will look as illustrated in Figure 23.2. A fraction of a second later, Sara’s clock
will be directly over Joe’s second clock (JC2), and this will be snapshot B, which
will look as illustrated in Figure 23.3.
Given the scenario just described, here is what the situation will look like from
Joe’s and Sara’s points of view.
From Joe’s point of view:
(J1)
(J2)
(J3)
(J4)

Sara is in motion, left to right, at 180,000 kilometers per second.
JC1 and JC2 are 1,000 kilometers apart.
JC1 and JC2 are synchronized.
At snapshot A, when SC1 is directly over JC1, all three clocks read the
same time, in particular, SC1, JC1, and JC2 all read 0.00.
(J5) At snapshot B, a fraction of a second later, SC1 passes over JC2.
Between snapshot A and snapshot B, Sara has traveled 1,000 kilo­
1;000
 0:005555 seconds
meters at 180,000 kilometers per second, so 180;000
have elapsed between snapshot A and snapshot B. So, at snapshot B,
when SC1 is directly over JC2, JC2 reads 0.005555. And since JC1 is
synchronized with JC2, JC1 also reads 0.005555.

Figure 23.2 Snapshot A.

23 The Special Theory of Relativity

Figure 23.3 Snapshot B.

(J6) Since Sara is in motion, time is moving more slowly for her and her
clock. In particular, although 0.005555 seconds have passed for Joe
qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2
between snapshot A and snapshot B, only 0:005555  1
c
seconds, that is, 0.004444 seconds, have passed for Sara. In other
words, at snapshot B, SC1 reads 0.004444.
Now let’s look at the situation from Sara’s point of view.
From Sara’s point of view:
(S1) Joe is in motion, right to left, at 180,000 kilometers per second.
qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2
(S2) JC1 and JC2 are only 1; 000  1
 800 kilometers apart.
c
∗

(S3) JC1 and JC2 are not synchronized. JC2 is ahead of JC1 by lc2v 
0:002000 seconds.
(S4) At snapshot A, when JC1 is directly under SC1, SC1 and JC1 both read
0.00. But JC2, since it is not synchronized with JC1 (see (S3) immedi­
ately above), reads 0.002000.
(S5) At snapshot B, a fraction of a second later, JC2 passes under SC1. Joe
has traveled 800 kilometers at 180,000 kilometers per second, so
800
180;000  0:004444 seconds have elapsed. So at snapshot B, when JC2
is directly under SC1, SC1 reads 0.004444.
(S6) Since Joe is in motion, time is moving more slowly for him and his
clocks. Between snapshot A and snapshot B, although 0.004444
qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2

seconds have passed for Sara, only 0:004444  1
c
0:003555 seconds have passed for Joe and his clocks. But remember
that at snapshot A, JC2 read 0.002000 (see (S4) above). Since at
snapshot A, JC2 read 0.002000, and between snapshot A and snapshot
B 0.003555 seconds have passed for Joe, at snapshot B, when JC2 is
directly under SC1, JC2 will read 0.002000 + 0.003555 = 0.005555.

203

204

Recent Developments

Note an important point about all the empirical facts Joe and Sara can jointly
verify. For example, at snapshot A, their two clocks are adjacent to one another, so
they can jointly verify the time on those clocks as the clocks are right next to one
another. We can imagine they each take a photograph that shows both SC1 and
JC1 at snapshot A. Their photographs had better look the same, since they are
photos of the same moment in space and time. And indeed, their photos will both
show SC1 and JC1 reading 0.00 at snapshot A.
Likewise at snapshot B. Here, JC2 and SC1 are directly next to each other, and
so Sara and Joe can independently take photos of the two clocks. And again, the
two photos had best look the same, unless the universe is far stranger than we
think it is. And indeed, the two photos will both show SC1 reading 0.004444, and
JC2 reading 0.005555.
But although Sara and Joe agree on these facts they can jointly verify, they will
disagree substantially on what has occurred. From Joe’s point of view, 0.005555
seconds have elapsed for him between snapshot A and snapshot B, whereas only
0.004444 seconds have elapsed for Sara. Hence, from Joe’s point of view, he is the
older twin.
But from Sara’s point of view, 0.004444 seconds have elapsed for her between
snapshot A and snapshot B, whereas only 0.0035555 seconds have elapsed for Joe.
Hence, from her point of view, she is the older twin.
In short, Sara and Joe both say that they are the older twin. And from their
respective points of view, each is equally right.
What about their disagreements on what the other clocks read?
Before closing this section, it may help to consider some of the disagreements
between Sara and Joe. As we saw above, they agree on what the clocks read in the
situations (snapshot A and snapshot B) where they can jointly verify what certain
of the clocks read. What about their disagreements? In particular, in snapshot A,
Sara and Joe disagree on what Joe’s distant clock JC2 reads. Likewise at snapshot
B, they disagree on what JC1 reads.
We considered above the idea that Sara and Joe could take photos of the clocks
as they were directly next to each other. And we saw that their photos would
appear the same. What if they took long-distance photos of the other clocks
involved? Recall that, at snapshot A, Sara and Joe disagree on what Joe’s second
clock, JC2, reads. Joe thinks that at snapshot A, JC2 reads 0.000, whereas Sara
thinks that at snapshot A, JC2 reads 0.002. So suppose at snapshot A, Sara and Joe
both take a long-distance photo of Joe’s second clock, JC2. Such a long distance
photo would be technically difﬁcult, but not impossible. So would such a photo
reveal a contradiction between Sara and Joe’s points of view?
The answer will be no, but to understand this situation, we need to remind
ourselves of some facts about light and long-distance photography. First, remind
yourself that the speed of light is fast, but still ﬁnite. That is, it takes time for light
to travel from an object to your eye, or from an object to a camera. To illustrate
this fact, consider the light from the sun. The sun is about 93,000,000 miles, or
150,000,000 kilometers, from Earth. At 300,000 kilometers per second, light takes
about eight minutes to travel from the sun to the Earth. So when you see the sun,

23 The Special Theory of Relativity

the light hitting your eye (that is, the light that is causing you to have your visual
image of the sun) left the sun about eight minutes earlier. In other words, what
you are seeing is not the sun as it is at this moment; rather, you are seeing the sun
as it was about eight minutes ago.
This point is much more dramatic when you think about light from stars. For
example, the Andromeda Galaxy is the most distant object you can see with the
naked eye, and this galaxy is about 2,500,000 light years away. When you look at
this galaxy, what you are seeing is the Andromeda Galaxy as it was 2.5 million
years ago, not as it is now, and if you take a photograph of it, your photograph will
be a photo of the Andromeda Galaxy as it was 2.5 million years ago.
So if at snapshot A Sara and Joe take photographs of Joe’s distant clock, that is,
JC2, they must take into account the fact that it took some time for the light that
caused the photograph to travel from the clock to their cameras. When they take
this fact into account, here is what the situation looks like.
First point: when Sara and Joe take photos of JC2, their photos will both show
the same time on JC2. Speciﬁcally, their photos will both show JC2 reading
0.003333. Don’t miss the negative sign – the clock is reading 0.003333 seconds
before it reaches 0.00. When the two of them take into account the time it takes
the light to travel from JC2 to the camera, the situation is as follows.
From Joe’s point of view

Joe’s work is easy. From his point of view, the light traveled 1,000 (j) kilometers
from JC2 to his camera. At 300,000 kilometers per second, the light will have
taken 0.003333 seconds to reach his camera. Joe deduces, correctly (for him), that
at the moment the photo was taken, that is, at snapshot A, JC2 read 0.003333 +
0.003333 = 0.000. He concludes, correctly (for him), that at snapshot A, both of
his clocks read 0.000, and that his two clocks are synchronized.
From Sara’s point of view

Sara’s calculations are a bit more difﬁcult. Still, they require nothing more than
basic algebra. If you want to skip the details, you can trust my ﬁgures and skip to
the end of this section. But if you are curious, here is how Sara reasons.
From Sara’s point of view, Joe is in motion toward her at 180,000 kilometers per
second. So the light that produced her photograph had to have left JC2 when JC2
was much further away than the 800 (s) kilometers separating JC1 and JC2. That
is, the light from JC2 – the light that results in her photo – is traveling toward her
at 300,000 kilometers per second. Joe, on the other hand, is traveling toward her at
180,000 kilometers per second. So for the light and Joe to reach her at the same
time, that is, at snapshot A, the light that results in her photo left JC2 when JC2
was much further away than the merely 800 (s) kilometers separating JC1 and JC2.
To ﬁgure out how far this light has traveled, Sara reasons as follows. Suppose d
represents the distance the light traveled (again, the light that resulted in Sara’s
photo of JC2). Suppose t represents the time it took this light to travel, at 300,000
kilometers per second, from JC2 to her camera. Then Sara knows that
t

d
300; 000

205

206

Recent Developments

Keeping in mind that Joe is 800 (s) kilometers closer to her than is JC2, and that
Joe is traveling at 180,000 kilometers per second, Sara also knows that
t

d 800
180; 000

With a little algebra, from these facts Sara can deduce that the light that produced
the picture left JC2 when JC2 was 2,000 (s) kilometers away. So the light traveled
2,000 (s) kilometers at 300,000 kilometers per second, which would take 0.00667
(s) seconds. Since JC2 is moving, its time is moving more slowly. In particular,
when 0.00667 (s) seconds have elapsed, only 0.005333 (j) seconds will have
elapsed on JC2. So when the light reached her camera (that is, at snapshot A, when
Joe and his ﬁrst clock are directly below her), 0.005333 (j) seconds have passed
on JC2.
So Sara deduces, correctly (for her), that at the moment the photo was taken,
JC2 read 0.003333 + 0.005333 = 0.00200. She concludes, correctly (for her), that
Joe’s two clocks are not synchronized. Rather, Joe’s second clock (JC2) is 0.00200
seconds ahead of his ﬁrst clock (JC1).
Once again, notice that Sara and Joe agree on what their respective photos read
– both show, at snapshot A, that JC2 reads 0.003333. But they disagree on what
this piece of data shows. For Joe, it conﬁrms that his clocks are synchronized and
that he is the older twin. For Sara, it conﬁrms that Joe’s clocks are not synchro­
nized and that she is the older twin. Notice an emerging trend – Sara and Joe will
agree on all the direct empirical data. But they disagree on what that data shows.
In particular, they disagree on issues involving how much time has elapsed, how
far apart objects are, and whether events are simultaneous.
In summary, there is no contradiction in special relativity. Even though it
seems counterintuitive, in the sorts of scenarios we are considering Sara and Joe
will each (from their own point of view) be the older twin, and each is equally
correct.

Spacetime, Invariants, and the Geometrical Approach to
Relativity
Shortly after Einstein published the special theory of relativity, one of his earlier
mathematics teachers, Hermann Minkowski (1864–1909), recognized that what
is called the spacetime interval is an invariant property of special relativity.
Understanding the spacetime interval will allow us to get an idea of one of the
central notions associated with relativity, namely the notion of spacetime, as well
as allow us to understand the concept of variant and invariant properties. It will
also allow us to see a brief sketch of a common alternative approach to relativity,
that being the geometrical approach.
Occasionally, one hears claims that, according to Einstein’s relativity theory,
“everything is relative,” or sentiments to that effect. As we saw above, length, time,
and simultaneity do indeed differ between moving and stationary points of view,
and thus such properties are relative to a point of view. But it is far from correct to
think that all properties are relative.

23 The Special Theory of Relativity

We have already seen one property that is not relative – the speed of light.
According to the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light, the speed of
light (in a vacuum) will always be measured to be the same, regardless of what
point of view is involved. According to relativity, then, the speed of light is not
relative. Properties that are the same from every point of view, such as the speed of
light in relativity theory, are considered invariant properties.
Note that different theories often treat different properties as variant and
invariant. For example, length, time (that is, how much time has passed between
two events), and simultaneity (that is, whether two events are or are not
simultaneous) were considered invariant on the Newtonian view, but as we
saw earlier in this chapter, these properties are not invariant according to
relativity theory. On the other hand, the speed of light is invariant on relativity
theory, but was not considered invariant on the Newtonian view. (Recall the
Michelson–Morley experiment discussed in the previous chapter, which was
designed to detect differences in the speed of light. As noted in that chapter,
the expectation, given the usual Newtonian view on how light moved, was that the
speed of light should be different in different circumstances. In other words,
the speed of light was thought to be a variant property on the Newtonian view.)
Although the amount of time that has passed, and the distance between
locations, can differ from one point of view to another according to relativity,
Minkowski recognized that a certain property associated with a “combination” of
space and time was the same from every point of view. That is, the property that
Minkowski introduced, which is termed the spacetime interval, is invariant on
relativity theory. To understand the spacetime interval, we need to ﬁrst under­
stand the notion of spacetime. Although “spacetime” and the “spacetime contin­
uum” can sound like mysterious entities, the basic idea is quite straightforward.
To understand the notion of spacetime, let’s begin by considering a typical twodimensional Cartesian coordinate system, of the sort illustrated in Figure 23.4.
We often (though not always) understand the horizontal and vertical axes as
representing positions in space. For example, suppose we take the point (0,0) to be
the center of a soccer ﬁeld. If we take our units to be meters, then a point such as
Figure 23.4 A typical Cartesian coordinate
system.

207

208

Recent Developments

(8,11) might represent a point that is 8 meters from the center of the ﬁeld in one
direction, let’s say in the direction of one of the sidelines, and 11 meters from the
center of the ﬁeld in another direction, say in the direction of one of the goals.
Next, suppose we again let the horizontal axis represent positions in space. In
particular, suppose this axis again represents distance in the direction of the
sidelines on our soccer ﬁeld. But now instead of letting the vertical axis represent
another spatial dimension, we will instead let the vertical axis represent time.
Suppose we have an individual who is at the center of the ﬁeld, and who at time 0
begins walking toward the sideline, moving 2 meters every second. Then (0,0),
(2,1), (4,2), (6,3), and so on, would represent this individual’s position, at 1-second
intervals, in space and time. That is, (0,0) represents that the individual is
located at point 0 at time 0, (2,1) represents that the individual is located at
point 2 at time 1, at point 4 at time 2, and so on.
At bottom, this is all there is to the notion of spacetime. It is simply a way of
representing positions in both space and time. A situation such as we just
described, in which there is only one spatial dimension along with time, would
be a two-dimensional spacetime. Including all three spatial dimensions, along
with time, results in a four-dimensional spacetime, where any point in this
spacetime can be represented as a 4-tuple (x, y, z, t), where x, y, and z represent the
usual three spatial dimensions, and t represents time.
Now that we have a handle on the notion of spacetime, let’s turn to the notion of
the spacetime interval. Consider again the situation with Sara and Joe pictured in
Figure 23.1. We can easily envision a spacetime coordinate system associated with
Joe’s point of view. We might, say, let the center of Joe’s ﬁrst clock be the origin of the
spatial components of this coordinate system, and we can let the moment that Joe’s
ﬁrst clock reads 0.00 be time 0. We can then say that the event of Joe’s ﬁrst clock
reading 0.00 occurred at spacetime coordinate (0,0,0,0). Suppose we take the x-axis
to be the direction of travel, and take the spatial units of the coordinate system to be
kilometers. If, as usual, we assume that (from Joe’s point of view) Joe’s two clocks are
synchronized, then we can say that the event of Joe’s second clock reading 0.00
occurred at spacetime coordinate (1000,0,0,0).
Now let’s consider the spacetime interval between these two events, that is, the
spacetime interval between the event of Joe’s ﬁrst clock reading 0.00 and the event
of Joe’s second clock reading 0.00. We can see that the space interval along the xaxis is 1000, the space intervals along the y- and z- axes are 0, and the time interval
is 0. If we let Δx, Δy, and Δz represent the space intervals between the two events
along the x-, y-, and z- axes, and let Δt represent the time interval between the two
events, then the spacetime interval s between the two events is given by the
following formula:
s2  c2 Δt 2

Δx2

Δy2

Δz2

So in this case, the spacetime interval between the two events is
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c2 02 10002 02 02
(Incidentally, in this case the result will be an imaginary number, that is, one
involving the square root of negative 1. Imaginary numbers are not as widely

23 The Special Theory of Relativity

known as, say, the natural numbers or the rational numbers, but imaginary
numbers are a well-understood and commonly used type of number in a variety of
ﬁelds, most notably mathematics and some branches of physics.)
In a sense, the spacetime interval is a sort of “distance” between events. Not the
distance the events are separated by in space, nor the distance they are separated
by in time, but rather the “distance” they are separated by using a measure
involving both space and time.
As mentioned above, the spacetime interval is an invariant property in
relativity. To illustrate this, let’s bring Sara back into the picture. We saw above
that we could specify a spacetime coordinate system associated with Joe’s point of
view. We can, of course, also associate a spacetime coordinate system with Sara’s
point of view. For convenience (we need not do this, but it makes the discussion
easier), we will assume that the origin point of Sara’s coordinate system is the
same as the origin point of Joe’s coordinate system. Note that, from Joe’s point of
view, the coordinate system associated with Sara is a moving coordinate system.
And since the coordinate system is moving, we know from our discussion earlier
in this chapter that times, distances, and simultaneity will be affected.
For example, we saw above that in Joe’s coordinate system, the event of his ﬁrst
clock reading 0.00, and the event of his second clock reading 0.00, occurred at
coordinates (0,0,0,0) and (1000,0,0,0) respectively. But in Sara’s coordinate
system, those events will not occur 1000 kilometers apart, nor will they be
simultaneous. In general, events will not have the same spacetime coordinates in
Sara’s coordinate system as they have in Joe’s.
However, there are straightforward equations, known as the Lorentz transfor­
mations, that allow one to transform coordinates from a stationary spacetime
coordinate system into a moving spacetime coordinate system. (I do not give
these equations in the body of this chapter, but if you are curious, they can be
found in the Chapter Notes at the end of the book. Also, here, as always in this
chapter, it is assumed that the coordinate systems are moving relative to one
another in a straight line with uniform motion.) When the coordinates (0,0,0,0)
and (1000,0,0,0) from Joe’s coordinate system are translated, using the Lorentz
transformations, into the corresponding coordinates in Sara’s coordinate system,
they come out to be (0,0,0,0) and (1250,0,0, 0.0025) respectively.
If we use the formula above to calculate the spacetime interval s between these
events in Sara’s coordinate system, we will see that the value comes out the same
as it did in Joe’s coordinate system. And in general, the spacetime interval between
any events in coordinate systems that are in straight-line, uniform motion relative
to one another will be the same. So although the space interval and time interval
between events will vary from coordinate system to coordinate system, the
spacetime interval will not. Again, this is just to say that the spacetime interval
is an invariant property in relativity theory.
In this section, then, we have gotten an idea of the notion of spacetime, and we
have seen one of the more important invariant properties associated with
spacetime, that being the spacetime interval. As a ﬁnal note in this section, it
is worth noting that this “geometrical” approach, that is, thinking of points of view
as four-dimensional spacetime coordinate systems that are moving relative to one
another, and using the Lorentz transformations to translate coordinates from one

209

210

Recent Developments

coordinate system to another, is a common way of approaching relativity. For
many purposes, this geometrical approach provides a convenient way of picturing
issues involving relativity. And of course, on this geometrical approach, one ﬁnds
the same relativistic effects we discussed earlier, that is, time dilation, space
contraction, and the relativity of simultaneity.

Concluding Remarks
In this chapter, we have looked at Einstein’s special theory of relativity, and we
have seen that the theory has nontrivial implications for our common-sense
beliefs about space, time, and simultaneity. With Einstein’s special theory of
relativity, we can see that some of the beliefs we have long had, and that most of us
took as obvious empirical facts, turn out to be mistaken. In this way, relativity
theory forces us to rethink some of these long-held beliefs. In the next chapter, we
look brieﬂy at the general theory of relativity, noting that it too has interesting
implications for common views, especially common views on the nature of
gravity.

211

24
The General Theory of Relativity
Between 1907 and 1916, Einstein spent considerable time and effort developing
the general theory of relativity. As mentioned earlier, general relativity is
substantially more complex than special relativity. Our main goal in this chapter
is to get a sense of the main aspects of general relativity, and to see some of the
main implications of the theory. We will begin by looking at the basic principles
on which general relativity is based.

Basic Principles
In the previous chapter, we saw that the special theory of relativity is based on two
basic principles, the principle of relativity and the principle of the constancy of the
velocity of light. In an important sense, the general theory of relativity is likewise
based on two basic principles, generally termed the principle of general covariance
and the principle of equivalence.
The principle of general covariance is usually summarized by the statement
that the laws of physics are the same in all reference frames. This principle is most
easily explained by comparing it with the principle of relativity from the previous
chapter. Recall that the principle of relativity states that, if two labs differ only in
that they are moving relative to one another in a straight line with uniform
velocity, then any experiment carried out in one lab will have an identical result if
carried out in the other lab. So, for example, in Figure 23.1, if the only difference
between Sara and Joe is that they are in straight-line, uniform motion relative to
one another, then if they carry out identical experiments, they will get identical
results.
In the chapter on special relativity I tended to speak of “points of view,” for
example, describing a situation ﬁrst from Joe’s point of view and then from Sara’s.
Such points of view are often referred to as frames of reference, or just reference
frames. Reference frames such as those of Sara and Joe, which involve only
uniform, straight-line motion, are referred to as inertial reference frames (or just
inertial frames). Using the notion of an inertial reference frame, the principle of
relativity can be phrased more succinctly to say that in all inertial reference
frames, identical experiments will have identical results. Or to say the same thing
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

212

Recent Developments

in another way, the laws of physics are the same in all inertial reference frames.
And indeed, the principle of relativity is often phrased in just this way.
Note that, when rephrased this way, we can see that the principle of general
covariance is a generalized version of the principle of relativity (in fact, although
the principle is now usually referred to as the principle of general covariance,
Einstein often referred to it as the “general principle of relativity”). So whereas the
principle of relativity says that, in essence, the laws of physics are the same in all
inertial frames, the principle of general covariance says that the laws of physics are
the same in all reference frames, regardless of how those reference frames might
be moving relative to one another. This is exactly the sense in which general
relativity is a general theory. Whereas special relativity applies so long as special
circumstances are met – in particular, so long as we are dealing with inertial
reference frames – general relativity removes this restriction, and applies to all
frames of reference.
Let us now turn to the other basic principle of general relativity, that being the
principle of equivalence. This principle states that effects due to acceleration, on
the one hand, and effects due to gravity, on the other, are indistinguishable. There
is probably no better way to illustrate this principle than by borrowing Einstein’s
usual example, which is the following.
Suppose you are in an enclosed room, about the size and shape of an elevator,
which is such that you have no way to see outside the room. In the ﬁrst case,
suppose (unknown to you) that this “elevator” is sitting on the surface of the Earth,
so that you are feeling the effects of the gravitational ﬁeld of the Earth. What
effects will you feel? Most notably, you will notice effects such as the feeling of
being “pulled” toward the ﬂoor of the elevator, and you will notice also that
dropped objects accelerate toward the ﬂoor at 9.8 meters per second per second.
Now suppose (again unknown to you) that you and the elevator are in a more or
less empty region of space (and so not being inﬂuenced in any substantial way by
any gravitational ﬁelds), but that the elevator is being accelerated “up” (that is, in
the direction of a line drawn from the ﬂoor through the ceiling) at 9.8 meters per
second per second. What effects will you feel as a result of this acceleration? Once
again, you will notice the feeling of being “pulled” toward the ﬂoor of the elevator,
and you will notice that dropped objects accelerate toward the ﬂoor at 9.8 meters
per second per second.
The key point to note is that the effects due to gravity, in the ﬁrst case, and the
effects due to acceleration, in the second case, are indistinguishable from one
another. This close relationship between effects due to gravity and effects due to
acceleration was recognized as far back as Newton. Nonetheless, in Newton’s
physics they are treated as separate phenomena, and the close relationship between
the two appears to be essentially a coincidence. But with general relativity, the
principle of equivalence is stating that, in essence, there is no difference between the
two types of effects – the effects are indistinguishable from one another.
In summary, then, the general theory of relativity, as with the special theory of
relativity, is in an important sense based on two basic principles. With this in
mind, we will move on to a brief discussion of the equations that are at the heart of
general relativity, as well as look at some of the conﬁrming evidence for that
theory.

24 The General Theory of Relativity

The Einstein Field Equations and Predictions
of General Relativity
As noted, the general theory of relativity is, in an important sense, based on the
principle of general covariance and the principle of equivalence. We saw in the
previous chapter that the special theory of relativity is likewise based on two basic
principles. And as we saw in that chapter, the mathematical “picture” that
accompanies the two basic principles of special relativity involved some surpris­
ing effects for length, time, and simultaneity. Also as noted, the mathematical
picture that accompanies the basic principles was not terribly difﬁcult to work out
(in that chapter we did not actually derive the effects on length, time, and
simultaneity from the basic principles, but I noted that the derivation could be
accomplished with no more than high-school algebra, and although the deriva­
tion is not trivial, neither is it particularly difﬁcult).
The situation with general relativity is quite different. Although the two basic
principles of general relativity are not difﬁcult to state, it turned out to be quite
difﬁcult to formulate the desired mathematical equations that would respect these
principles. Einstein spent several years working on these equations, with many
preliminary results that later had to be taken back or substantially revised. In
short, the mathematical account required by the two basic principles took an
enormous amount of work to ﬁgure out. And the equations themselves, unlike the
equations that accompany special relativity, are quite complex.
By 1916, however, Einstein had worked out the equations he sought, and he
presented them in a 1916 paper titled “The Foundation of the General Theory of
Relativity.” These equations are now referred to as Einstein’s ﬁeld equations, and
they are the mathematical core of general relativity. The general idea is that
solutions to these equations indicate how space, time, and matter inﬂuence each
other. For example, one solution shows the way space and time should be affected
by the presence of a body such as our sun. Another solution shows how space and
time should be affected when a massive star collapses to form an extraordinarily
dense remnant – what is generally termed a black hole. (As a brief aside, black
holes were long thought to be mere theoretical possibilities, but not actually
existing objects. This changed in the second half of the twentieth century,
however, and it is now widely accepted that black holes are not at all uncommon,
and likely are present at the center of most galaxies.)
As with special relativity, general relativity also makes some unique predictions.
I will mention a few of these very brieﬂy, and then spend a bit more time on
another consequence of general relativity, that being the curvature of spacetime.
At the beginning of Chapter 8, we brieﬂy discussed the fact that for some
decades, some peculiarities about the orbit of Mercury had been observed. Recall
that planets orbit in ellipses, and this is all in keeping with the predictions of
Newtonian science. Now envision the point of Mercury’s orbit that is closest to
the sun. This closest point of an orbit is termed the perihelion, and what had been
observed, for some decades during the mid- to late 1800s, was that the perihelion
of Mercury moved slightly during each orbit, such that the point was very, very
slowly rotating around the sun. The amount the perihelion of Mercury moved

213

214

Recent Developments

each year was extremely small, but it was measurable, and moreover it was not
what one would expect from the Newtonian account of planetary motion. In his
1916 paper, however, Einstein showed that his equations predicted that the
perihelion of Mercury should advance each year, and the amount predicted by
Einstein’s general relativity was just the amount that had been observed. This,
then, was a reasonably straightforward example of conﬁrming evidence for
general relativity, of the sort discussed in Chapter 4.
Likewise, in the 1916 paper Einstein showed that if general relativity is correct,
then the wavelength of light moving away from a strong gravitational ﬁeld should
be shifted toward the red end of the spectrum. This effect is known as gravita­
tional redshift. Since a star has a strong gravitational ﬁeld, light leaving a star, for
example, light from the sun, should be redshifted. The redshift predicted by
general relativity is not easy to test, but in the experiments that have been
conducted, the observed redshift matches well with the predications of general
relativity, again providing conﬁrming evidence for the theory. Light moving away
from a less massive body such as the Earth should also be redshifted, and although
the predicted effect is quite small, this too has been measured, and it also ﬁts well
with the predictions of general relativity.
In the previous chapter, in discussing the special theory of relativity, we saw
that motion affects both space and time. In general relativity, motion also has
similar effects on space and time. Moreover, gravitational forces (or equivalently,
the effects of acceleration and deceleration) also affect space and time. For
example, in the presence of a strong gravitational ﬁeld, or, equivalently, in an
accelerating reference frame, time moves more slowly. Importantly, unlike special
relativity, there is a sense in which these effects are not symmetric. For example,
suppose Joe remains on the surface of the Earth, and Sara leaves on a high-speed
space mission. Suppose she accelerates for a period of time, then decelerates when
she reaches her destination, turns around and accelerates again for a period of
time as she begins the return trip to Earth, and then again decelerates when she
approaches the Earth. During her trip she will experience the effects of accelera­
tion and deceleration, and these will be effects not experienced by Joe. In this
situation, general relativity predicts that less time will have passed for Sara than
for Joe, and both Sara and Joe will agree on this.
Given the extremely accurate timekeeping devices we currently have, these
sorts of effects on time are not difﬁcult to test, and the effects predicted by general
relativity have been well conﬁrmed. Even the very small gravitational differences
between the ground ﬂoor and top ﬂoor of a tall building should, according to
general relativity, produce small differences (very small) in the rate that time
passes on the top ﬂoor of a tall building compared to the rate that time passes on
the ground ﬂoor. Even these very small differences in time have been measured,
and are what general relativity predicts. In short, there are numerous cases of
conﬁrming evidence for general relativity.
As mentioned at the beginning of Chapter 4, the observed bending of starlight
during the solar eclipse of 1919 provided some early and well-publicized
conﬁrming evidence for general relativity. This observation takes us into one
of the more interesting aspects of general relativity, that being the curvature of
spacetime. Hence this is worth going through a bit more slowly.

24 The General Theory of Relativity

Figure 24.1 Magnetic ﬁeld lines.

To get a sense of the curvature of spacetime predicted by general relativity, it
might help to begin with an example that has little to do with relativity, but that
will provide a convenient example with which to contrast relativity. Suppose we
have a bar magnet, and suppose we put a piece of paper over the magnet. We then
put iron ﬁlings on the paper, and shake the ﬁlings around a bit. In this situation,
the iron ﬁlings will arrange themselves in a particular pattern, with this pattern
reﬂecting the magnetic ﬁeld surrounding the magnet. The magnetic ﬁeld itself is
often pictured as it appears in Figure 24.1. The lines in such a picture are
commonly referred to as ﬁeld lines, and in this case, they represent the strength
and direction of the magnetic ﬁeld. For example, where the ﬁeld is stronger, the
lines are closer together; where weaker, the lines are further apart. (For ease of
presentation, Figure 24.1 is somewhat simpler than most diagrams of ﬁeld lines.
Typically, such diagrams will include more detailed ﬁeld lines, as well as arrows
indicating the direction of the forces involved.) Now, notice an important feature
of the diagram. The ﬁeld lines suggest forces that exist in space and, presumably,
also in time. That is, the ﬁeld lines suggest that, say, in a particular region of space
near the magnet, an iron ﬁling would be under the inﬂuence of certain magnetic
forces and, perhaps, would tend to move a particular way through space and time.
In short, space and time typically provide a backdrop for such ﬁeld lines, or to put
it another way, such ﬁeld lines appear to exist in space and time.
Now consider Figure 24.2, the sort of diagram often found in discussions of
general relativity. On the face of it, the ﬁeld lines in such a diagram look similar to
the ﬁeld lines in Figure 24.1. But there is a crucial difference: these ﬁeld lines do
not represent a ﬁeld in space and time; rather, the ﬁeld lines represent a curvature
of spacetime itself. (Incidentally, as we saw in the previous chapter, spacetime is a
four-dimensional continuum involving the usual three spatial dimensions
together with a dimension representing time. Figures such as 24.2 typically
represent two-dimensional “slices” through the four-dimensional spacetime.)

215

216

Recent Developments

Figure 24.2 Typical ﬁeld lines in general relativity.

According to general relativity, the presence of a massive body results in a
curvature of spacetime. The ﬁeld lines in diagrams like Figure 24.2 represent such
a curvature of spacetime in the presence of a body such as the sun. In this sort of
diagram, if an object travels along the surface of the “slice,” the shortest path
between two points will be a curved line (such a shortest path is termed a
geodesic). Since light will take the shortest path, light passing near a large body
such as the sun should follow what appears to be a curved path. In short, if general
relativity is correct, a massive body such as the sun should result in a curvature of
spacetime, and hence we should be able to observe the bending of starlight as it
passes near a body such as the sun.
In his paper of 1916, Einstein provided the amounts by which one would expect
starlight to be bent near the sun. And as discussed in Chapter 4, the bending of
starlight observed during the 1919 solar eclipse was in good agreement with
Einstein’s predictions, again providing important conﬁrming evidence for general
relativity.
Concerning spacetime, and the curvature of spacetime, one ﬁnal and quite
recent experimental conﬁrmation of relativity is worth mentioning. Early on,
Einstein and others recognized that general relativity predicts the existence of
what are termed gravitational waves. Gravitational waves are, in a sense, ripples in
spacetime. Consider again ﬁgure 24.2, and imagine a sort of ripple moving
through this slice of spacetime. That would be a gravitational wave. Whereas
ripples in the surface of a pond radiate out from where perhaps a pebble was
dropped, gravitational waves would radiate out from the source of an enormous
release of energy (for example, energy released from a supernova, which is an
explosion of a massive star near the end of the life of the star).
Gravitational waves passing through our region of spacetime should not be at
all uncommon; however, detecting them had proved to be extremely difﬁcult.
Much as a ripple in a pond will diminish in size the further it is from its source, so
too with gravitational waves. Gravitational waves may well be quite substantial at
their origin. But after traveling through spacetime at the speed of light over
enormous distances for millions or billions of years, they will be quite difﬁcult to
detect by the time they reach the Earth. However, in late 2015, and just in time for
the hundredth anniversary of the publication of Einstein’s paper on general
relativity, a pair of specially designed detectors independently recorded the
passage of a gravitational wave. The wave appears to have originated a little
over a billion years ago, and stemmed from the collision of two large black holes
over a billion light years away. Although indirect evidence of gravitational waves

24 The General Theory of Relativity

dates back several decades, this was the ﬁrst direct (and dramatic) conﬁrmation of
this prediction of general relativity. (Incidentally, the detection of the waves was
important in itself, but it also looks quite promising in terms of ushering in a new
way of gathering information about deep space, via what is now sometimes
referred to as “gravitational wave astronomy.”)
In summary, general relativity makes a number of unusual predictions, such as
those discussed above. Observations have been in agreement with these predic­
tions, and, overall, general relativity is widely considered to be a well-conﬁrmed
theory.

Philosophical Reﬂections: General Relativity and Gravity
Before closing this chapter, one ﬁnal issue closely tied to general relativity is worth
discussing, that being the account of gravity provided by this theory. To say that
the account of gravity is an issue tied to general relativity is perhaps a bit of an
understatement, in that general relativity is often construed primarily as a theory
of gravity.
As we saw in the discussion above, light travels along the shortest path
available. In general relativity, bodies not under the inﬂuence of any forces
will also move along the shortest path, that is, bodies generally move on geodesics.
Importantly – and this is a crucial difference from the way gravity is typically
conceived of on the Newtonian account – a body such as a planet does not move
as it does because of any attractive force. Mars, for example, does not move in an
elliptical orbit around the sun because of anything to do with a mutually attractive
force – a gravitational force – between Mars and the sun. Rather, Mars, like any
body in motion, moves in a straight line.
But a “straight line” in a curved space is a geodesic. As we have seen, according
to general relativity, a body such as the sun will result in a curvature of spacetime.
And according to the equations of general relativity, this curvature is such that the
geodesic on which Mars should move would be what appears to be an ellipse
about the sun. In other words, on general relativity, there is no attractive “force”
between bodies such as Mars and the sun. Rather, Mars is simply moving in a
straight line, but due to the curvature of spacetime, that “straight line” appears to
be an ellipse about the sun.
Note that this is a very different treatment of gravity on general relativity, as
opposed to the treatment gravity receives in Newtonian science. On the Newto­
nian picture, gravity is typically taken as an attractive force between objects. As we
noted at the end of Chapter 20, such a force, if taken with a realist attitude, seems
to be a case of action at a distance. And as discussed in Chapter 20, this suggestion
of action at a distance was troublesome for Newton, and as a result, he often
professed to take an instrumentalist attitude toward gravity.
In spite of Newton’s own claims on the matter, most people raised in the
Newtonian worldview tend to take a realist attitude toward gravity. To use an
example we saw earlier, if I drop a pen, and ask “Why did the pen fall?” the
standard response will be that it fell because of the force of gravity. And if asked
whether this force is real, the usual response is that of course it is. That is, people

217

218

Recent Developments

by and large tend to think of gravity as a really existing, attractive force between
objects. In short, gravity is typically taken, in the Newtonian view, with a realist
attitude.
But now note an interesting consequence of the treatment of gravity on general
relativity. As noted above, general relativity is a well-conﬁrmed theory. And if we
take general relativity with a realist attitude, it essentially forces us to adopt an
instrumentalist attitude toward the Newtonian concept of gravity. That is, if
objects fall toward the Earth or planets move about the sun in elliptical orbits
because of the curvature of spacetime and not because of any attractive forces
between objects, then talk of gravity as an attractive force is at best a convenient,
but not literally correct, way of speaking.
In summary, general relativity is a well-conﬁrmed theory. Notably, with respect
to prediction and explanation (of the movement of the perihelion of Mercury, or
the bending of starlight, to name just two), general relativity does a better job than
Newtonian theory. Newtonian theory is still a very useful theory, but if we want to
consider which theory more accurately accounts for the known data, there is not
much question that relativity does the better job.
As a consequence of this, if we are inclined to take a realist attitude toward
theories in physics, then we ought to be realists about relativity theory and
instrumentalists about Newtonian theory (Newtonian physics is, after all, still
useful, although not, strictly speaking, a correct picture). But note that this forces
us to adopt an instrumentalist attitude toward the notion of gravity as an
attractive force – in other words, general relativity forces us to reassess an
attitude (that is, a realist conception of gravity as an attractive force) that most
tend to take for granted. In short, general relativity, as with special relativity,
forces us to rethink some commonly held views.

Concluding Remarks
In this and the previous chapter, we have seen that the special and general theories
of relativity have interesting implications for beliefs most of us have long held as
basic, commonsensical beliefs. These include beliefs about length, time intervals,
and simultaneity, as well as common beliefs about the nature of gravity. In
particular, with respect to gravity, general relativity forces us to adopt an
instrumentalist attitude toward the usual notion of gravity as an attractive force.
Recall that in the 1600s, new discoveries forced changes in the usual views of
the world. We are likewise seeing that new discoveries are forcing us to reassess
some of our common beliefs about the world. In the ﬁnal chapter, we will return
to a discussion of some of the implications Einstein’s theory of relativity has for
the Newtonian worldview. First, though, we explore the other major branch of
twentieth-century physics, that being quantum theory.

219

25
Philosophical Interlude: Are (Some) Scientiﬁc
Theories Incommensurable?
My main goal in this chapter is to provide an overview of issues involving
incommensurability, and to provide enough of an understanding of the issues to
serve as a background for further explorations. The term is probably not widely
known outside of the history and philosophy of science, so our ﬁrst task, in a
moment, will be to take a preliminary look of what it means to say that certain
scientiﬁc terms or theories are incommensurable.
Issues surrounding incommensurability, as with other issues we have explored,
are controversial. There is a rich body of writings exploring and arguing for
various positions, and as with a number of controversial topics concerning the
history and philosophy of science, no consensus has emerged. As usual, for those
wishing to explore this issue further, the Chapter Notes at the end of the book
provide additional reading. We will begin with a section aimed at communicating
the general issues involved in incommensurability, and then move on to discuss
some of the more detailed and complicating issues surrounding this topic.

Preliminary Considerations
To get a ﬁrst approximation of the way “incommensurability” is currently used,
consider the term “mass,” which plays a prominent role within both the older
Newtonian physics and the newer relativistic physics. Some have argued that,
within each theory, the term inhabits such conceptually different environments,
and plays such conceptually different roles, as to make it impossible to accurately
capture the Newtonian meaning of the term within the framework of relativistic
physics. If this argument is correct – that is, if there is no adequate, acceptably
accurate way to translate the Newtonian use and meaning of the term using the
terms and concepts of our newer physics – then we would say that “mass” as used
in Newtonian physics is incommensurable with “mass” as used in the newer
relativistic physics. If one extends this view to the theories themselves, we would
say that Newtonian physics and relativistic physics are incommensurable, that is,
there is no way to adequately capture – to accurately express, or accurately
understand – the old theory in terms of the newer theory.

Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

220

Recent Developments

Why might one think terms from different scientiﬁc theories, or even the entire
theories themselves, might be incommensurable? In the remainder of this section
I will try to provide a preliminary answer to this question. Then in the next section
we will turn to different ways incommensurability has been argued to exist, as well
as ﬂeshing out some of the complexities surrounding incommensurability.
Let’s begin with what seems like one of our most everyday, simple, and
straightforward concepts, that of weight, and consider how the term is used
within the Aristotelian tradition and the Newtonian tradition. It is worth noting
that although modern physics – in particular relativistic physics – has implica­
tions for our understanding of weight, for most practical purposes we still today
use what is essentially the Newtonian concept. I’ll thus often refer to this as the
modern concept of weight.
At least since Galileo, Aristotle has been roundly criticized for holding the
(presumably badly mistaken) belief that the speed at which an object falls is
proportional to its weight, and that in particular an object with twice as much
weight as another will fall twice as fast. The following sort of lab exercise, which
presumably shows Aristotle’s views on falling bodies to be mistaken, can be found
in numerous physics texts, lab manuals, history of science books, and the like.
First, one is directed to weigh two objects, and determine that one weighs twice as
much as the other. The objects are then dropped at the same time from the same
height, and it is presumably established that Aristotle is not merely wrong, but
badly wrong.
The view that Aristotle held the “twice the weight, twice as fast” belief, and that
this belief is badly mistaken, is quite widespread. But if we look more closely at this
issue, we can quickly see that the situation is not so simple. And we can quickly see
that the concept of weight as it functions within Aristotle’s physics has striking
differences from the concept of weight as it functions in modern physics.
Following along with this lab exercise, suppose we weigh the two objects with a
balance scale – such balance scales were common in Aristotle’s time as well – and
we determine that the one object weighs twice as much as the other. So far, so
good. Aristotle would have agreed that, in the context of putting these two objects
on a balance scale and determining their weight, the one object would have twice
the weight of the other. Notably, and this will be important shortly, Aristotle
would not have deﬁned weight in terms of an object’s inﬂuence on a balance scale
(nor do we deﬁne weight that way in modern physics), but he would have accepted
that an object’s inﬂuence on a scale does reﬂect something about its weight.
Now we move to the next step in the lab exercise, where we remove the objects
from the scale, and drop them from the same height. And we note that the one
object – the one that presumably has twice the weight – most assuredly does not
fall twice as fast. We thus conclude that Aristotle’s “twice the weight, twice as fast”
view was mistaken.
But there is a crucial presupposition in this argument. You may wish to pause
for a moment to see if you can identify that presupposition.
Ready? In order to draw the conclusion, it is necessary to presuppose that the
objects continue to have the same weight throughout the experiment. Or to put it
slightly differently, we have to presuppose, having determined in the context of
weighing the objects on a scale that one has twice the weight, that when we move

25 Are (Some) Scientiﬁc Theories Incommensurable?

the objects to a new context – of being dropped – they continue to have the same
weight as they did when on the scale.
Within modern physics, this presupposition is unproblematic. There are some
extremely minor effects on weight stemming from relativistic physics, but for all
practical purposes it is unproblematic, within the context of modern physics, to
view these objects as having the same weight throughout the scenario of the lab
experiment. (By the way, it is sometimes thought, in the context of modern
science, that an object in free fall is weightless. But generally speaking, that’s a
mistake. It is correct that an object in free fall will act as if it is weightless, and this
is sometimes described as saying an object in free fall has no “apparent weight.”
But the actual weight of an object, as deﬁned within modern physics, for all
practical purposes remains the same whether it is on a scale or falling.)
But would Aristotle agree that the objects have the same weight throughout
this lab scenario? The answer is straightforward: no. In the Aristotelian scientiﬁc
tradition, context is critical, and the context of an object resting in the pan of a
balance scale and the context of that object falling are two different contexts. And
in the Aristotelian view, that context makes a difference to the object’s weight.
Consider the fact that a falling object will inﬂuence a balance scale in a
substantially different way than that object will inﬂuence the scale when merely
resting in the pan of the scale. We understand this difference in terms of
Newtonian concepts such as force, mass, and acceleration. But within the
Aristotelian tradition, there are no concepts that play roles anything like the
roles these concepts play within Newtonian physics. In contrast, Aristotle would
have understood the difference in the way an object affects a balance scale when
falling versus when resting in the pan as reﬂecting that the object’s weight in the
one context is different than in the other.
None of what we’ve just discussed demonstrates conclusively that Aristotle’s
concept of weight and the modern concept of weight are incommensurable. We
will explore this further in the next section. But although we have only scratched
the surface of this example involving weight, we can already draw some general
conclusions. First, we have to be careful about imposing presuppositions that are
appropriate and natural in the context of our science onto a context involving a
different scientiﬁc tradition. And as a close corollary, we can also see that it can be
a mistake – a substantial mistake – to impose modern understandings of a term or
concept on the way that term or concept is used and understood in a different
scientiﬁc tradition.
Considerations such as these, as well as other considerations, have led some to
conclude that at least some terms and concepts from different scientiﬁc theories,
and perhaps the entire theories themselves, are genuinely incommensurable.
With this in mind, let’s move on to explore incommensurability more deeply.

Exploring Incommensurability
Historically, the concept of incommensurability dates back to the ancient Greek
mathematicians, who came to understand the concept primarily in terms of
whether two lengths could be, roughly, “co-measured.” Consider two rods, one 4

221

222

Recent Developments

meters in length and the other 6 meters. A 2-meter measuring stick will divide
evenly into each of those two rods, and thus the lengths of those two rods are co­
measurable in the sense that there is a third length that divides evenly into them.
Being co-measurable in this sense, lengths of 4 meters and 6 meters would be
commensurable lengths. (Equivalently, one could deﬁne this sort of commensu­
rability in terms of the ratio of the lengths, which in this example is 2/3. We could
say that two lengths are commensurable if the ratio of their lengths can be
expressed as a rational number, that is, a number of the form a/b, where a and b
are integers.)
In contrast, and to use an example that played an important role in the
development of ancient Greek mathematics, consider a square and the diagonal of
that square. Suppose the sides of the square are 1 meter in length. Then
p we know
from the Pythagorean theorem that the diagonal of the square will be 2. It is not
difﬁcult to give a proof (as far as we know, the ancient Greek mathematicians were
the ﬁrst to do so)pthat there is no length, no measuring
stick, that will divide evenly
p
into both 1 and 2, and thus lengths of 1 and 2 are incommensurable lengths.
(Incidentally, the proof that these lengths are incommensurable led to the
important discovery that in addition to integers and rational numbers, there
must also be irrational numbers. If you are interested in the history of mathe­
matics, the Chapter Notes provide references to enable you to pursue this
further.)
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, the mathematical concept of
incommensurability began to be used somewhat more metaphorically, for
example in the works of Pierre Duhem (1861–1916; we ﬁrst explored some of
Duhem’s contributions in Chapter 5) in areas concerning the history and
philosophy of science. These nonmathematical uses of the term remained rooted
in the idea of non-co-measurability, but the concept became more broadly
conceived, more along the lines of “co-deﬁnability” or “co-understandability.”
Later in the twentieth century, the concept of incommensurability began to
play an increasingly prominent role. This is due primarily to the work of Thomas
Kuhn (1922–96), on the one hand, and Paul Feyerabend (1924–94) on the other.
From the 1960s and throughout the remainder of their careers, Kuhn and
Feyerabend explored in some depth various ways incommensurability could
be understood, and various ways incommensurability might affect our under­
standing of science. While not attempting to characterize in detail the nuanced
views of Kuhn, Feyerabend, and others – doing so would be beyond the scope of
this chapter – we can certainly explore some of the ways incommensurability has
been argued to arise when considering different scientiﬁc traditions.
Let’s continue to use traditions we have explored earlier in this book, namely,
the different scientiﬁc traditions of Aristotelian physics and Newtonian physics.
The next three subsections focus on different though overlapping ways that
certain features of these traditions have been argued to be incommensurable.
Terminological incommensurability
At least one aspect of what is often termed terminological incommensurability
was illustrated in the ﬁrst main section of this chapter. In that section we saw that

25 Are (Some) Scientiﬁc Theories Incommensurable?

understanding Aristotle’s concept of weight in terms of the Newtonian concept of
weight, which is frequently done, is a misunderstanding. Whatever Aristotle’s
concept of weight was, it was not the Newtonian concept. Nor, it seems, can the
Aristotelian concept of weight be translated into any sort of a straightforward
Newtonian equivalent. Part of the reason for this is that Newtonian concepts such
as mass, force and acceleration, which play a key role in the Newtonian concept of
weight, were concepts that had no counterparts in the context of Aristotelian
physics.
It is worth noting that the lack of such conceptual counterparts does not by
itself rule out being able to give at least a rough translation of terms from one
tradition to another. For example, if Aristotle had deﬁned weight in terms of the
way an object affects a balance scale, then, given that we understand the effect on a
balance scale in terms of force, mass, and acceleration, we probably could have
given a reasonably accurate characterization of Aristotle’s concept of weight in
modern terms.
But as noted, Aristotle did not deﬁne weight in this way. And when we look
further into passages that shed some light on how he did understand weight, we
quickly run into an issue central to terminological incommensurability, namely,
that terms and concepts within a scientiﬁc tradition are usually deﬁned or
characterized by reference to other terms and concepts within that same tradition.
Kuhn in particular argued that terms within a tradition can generally only be
understood by relations to other terms within that tradition. And those other terms
and concepts face the same issue, that is, those other terms and concepts generally
resist translation into the terms and concepts of a different tradition.
To get a clearer sense of Kuhn’s point, let’s continue with our example involving
Aristotle’s conception of weight. In the writings that have come down to us,
Aristotle never provides a deﬁnition or clear characterization of what he and his
followers understood weight to be. We can, though, piece together at least some
uncontroversial aspects of Aristotle’s understanding of weight.
First, it is clear that Aristotle sees weight as closely tied to his concept of
dunamis, which is generally translated as “potency” or “potentiality.” Potency is
one of the most central concepts within Aristotle’s natural science, but
unfortunately – and you can probably see this coming – there is no consensus
on how Aristotle’s concept of potency ought to be understood. In some broad
sense, the sort of matter an acorn is composed of, and the arrangement of that
matter, gives the acorn an internal, goal-directed potency, a potential, under the
right circumstances, to develop into a mature oak tree. And this captures some
aspects of the Aristotelian concept of potency.
But Aristotle’s understanding of potency, and the role potency plays in his
natural science, is more subtle and nuanced than the overly simplistic account just
given. There has been an enormous amount written, especially in recent years,
and a great deal of argumentation, and a good deal of sometimes quite funda­
mental disagreement, on how we ought to understand the more nuanced aspects
of Aristotle’s concept of potency. However, nothing close to a consensus has
emerged.
You can quickly see the problem. Aristotle viewed an object’s weight as closely
tied to aspects of that object’s potencies. But potency itself is not a term easily

223

224

Recent Developments

translatable into any modern concepts. And Aristotle’s understanding of potency
is in turn closely tied to other central Aristotelian concepts such as activity or
actuality, form, causes of motion, and much more. And, no big surprise, those
Aristotelian concepts likewise resist anything resembling straightforward trans­
lations into modern concepts.
Kuhn in particular argued at length that, to return to a metaphor used often in
this book, concepts from a scientiﬁc tradition, such as Aristotelian science, are
best viewed as existing within an interconnected web of concepts, or perhaps an
interconnected conceptual jigsaw puzzle. And thus, according to the adherents of
this sort of incommensurability, these sorts of concepts cannot be deﬁned or
adequately characterized within the framework of a different web of concepts,
such as that of modern science. Rather, if such concepts can be adequately
understood, it can only be done by understanding the role they play within the
context of the conceptual environment in which they live.
Methodological incommensurability
In addition to the sort of terminological incommensurability discussed in the
previous section, Kuhn and others have argued that there is a broader way in
which different scientiﬁc traditions tend to be incommensurable. This additional
type of incommensurability, it is argued, goes beyond a mere inability to
adequately translate terms from one tradition to another. Rather, and especially
in cases where one major tradition has replaced another (for example, in the way
Newtonian physics supplanted Aristotelian physics), the claim is that the meth­
odology in the new tradition is often radically different from the methodology of
the other.
A key idea behind this sort of incommensurability is that different scientiﬁc
traditions often disagree on fundamental issues regarding, broadly speaking, the
proper conduct of science. Different scientiﬁc traditions see fundamentally
different questions as being the key questions the science ought to address;
different traditions bring fundamentally different assumptions and presupposi­
tions to their work; different traditions have fundamentally different views on the
proper way scientiﬁc explanation ought to proceed; and more.
To illustrate some aspects of this sort of incommensurability, consider again
the Aristotelian and Newtonian traditions, and how they approach issues involv­
ing motion. Recall a central view of motion before the 1600s, that is, prior to the
emergence of Newtonian science. This was what we earlier (in Chapter 12)
termed the “pre-1600s view of motion,” namely, that an object in motion will
come to a halt, unless something keeps it moving. This view of motion would have
been a central (and at the time, empirically well-supported) view of motion during
the period when Aristotelian science was dominant.
Given this view, everything that moves must have a source of motion. And not
just a source that gets the motion started, but additionally, a source that is
continually active throughout the duration of the motion. To sum this up, within
the Aristotelian tradition, the following would have been a fundamental tenet, a
sort of guiding principle: Everything that moves is moved by something, and that
something has to be continually active throughout the duration of the motion.

25 Are (Some) Scientiﬁc Theories Incommensurable?

As a result of this fundamental tenet, within the Aristotelian tradition a central
question, and central research topic, was discovering the sources for a wide variety
of motions. For example, in On the Motion of Animals (as well as in many other
works), Aristotle explores in depth the source of the wide variety of movements
found in animals. Notably, Aristotle’s concept of motion is much broader than
ours, and includes, for example, growth, nourishment, embryological develop­
ment, the way an insult may cause one to redden with anger, internal bodily
changes arising from sensory input, and much more. All of these sorts of changes,
of motions, must have a source, something that is responsible for initiating the
movement and that is active throughout the duration of the motion. Thus,
discovering these sources of motion is a fundamentally important question for
Aristotle and the Aristotelian tradition.
A similar story holds for writings such as Aristotle’s On the Heavens (as well as
others), in which he spends considerable time exploring the perpetual source of
motion for the heavenly bodies. Likewise in the Physics (and elsewhere), consid­
erable time is spent on natural and forced motions, such as ﬁnding the initiating
and continuing source of motion responsible for a rock falling downward
(natural) or the initiating and continuing source of motion of a projectile in
ﬂight (forced). I could go on, but you get the picture. Because of the key tenet
noted above, within the Aristotelian tradition, ﬁnding the initial and continuing
sources, for an enormously wide variety of motions, is a recurring and funda­
mental question.
Now consider what happens once the Newtonian approach is accepted. Recall
that one of the fundamental tenets of Newtonian science is what we term the
principle of inertia – a body in motion remains in motion, unless acted upon by an
outside force. Once this fundamental principle becomes accepted, notice that a
huge swath of what would have been key, fundamental questions within the
Aristotelian tradition just go poof! Within the point of view of the new science,
these simply become nonquestions.
To use a concrete example, consider the motion of a heavenly body such as
Mars. Within the Aristotelian tradition, there had to be a continual source of
motion, some source that is active every microsecond of every day, that is
responsible for Mars’ continual motion. What could provide a continual and
(for Aristotle at least) eternal source of motion was an extraordinarily difﬁcult
question (we saw at least an overview of Aristotle’s answer in Chapter 12). And as
noted, Aristotle spent a considerable amount of writing addressing this question.
But now look at this from within the Newtonian tradition. Within this tradition,
the natural tendency of an object in motion is to remain in motion. So there is no
need to look for any active source of motion for the continual movement of Mars.
That is just what bodies in motion do – they remain in motion. No further
explanation is needed; there are no such questions to address. To put it slightly
differently, questions about the source of Mars’ motion, and the sources of a huge
variety of other types of motion, simply go away within the context of the new
science.
I could give many more examples of other topics that were of central
importance within the Aristotelian tradition that similarly simply disappear
within the context of the new Newtonian tradition. But again, I think you get

225

226

Recent Developments

the picture. Those who argue that this sort of methodological incommensurability
exists argue that the approaches, the key questions arising from the basic tenets of
traditions such as Aristotelian physics and Newtonian physics, are so radically
different as to make it impossible to adequately capture, to adequately under­
stand, the central issues of the one tradition within the context of the other
tradition. That is, the claim is that basic approaches, the basic questions, the basic
methodology, of the two traditions are incommensurable.
Different worlds incommensurability
The phrase I am using here, different worlds incommensurability, is not a
standard phrase. In fact, although this sort of incommensurability has been
widely discussed, there is no standard label for it. It is clear that this sort of
(alleged) incommensurability is difﬁcult to characterize precisely (Kuhn himself
said as much), and it is also clear that this sort of incommensurability is less widely
accepted than are the types discussed in the preceding two sections. Given this, I
will in this section attempt only to convey a ﬂavor of what advocates of this sort of
incommensurability have in mind.
Different worlds incommensurability revolves around the idea that scientists in
different traditions, such as the Aristotelian and Newtonian traditions, “see” the
world differently. The idea, or at least the idea behind the more interesting (and
more controversial) version of this type of incommensurability, is not that
scientists from different traditions interpret the world differently; rather, the
claim is that such scientists see the world differently. As Kuhn put it, scientists in
such different traditions “practice their trades in different worlds” (Kuhn 1962,
p. 150).
To get a better sense of this, let’s consider an oft-cited example that originates
with a classic experiment from about 1950. Most of us have experience, from an
early age, with ordinary playing cards, the sort of cards we might, say, play poker
with. Such cards have two red suits, hearts and diamonds, and two black suits,
clubs and spades. It is well established that most of us can correctly identify
speciﬁc playing cards even when a card is ﬂashed before us very brieﬂy, in as little
as 30 milliseconds (30/1000 of a second – a very brief time).
But what happens if subjects are exposed, without being told, to anomalous
playing cards, ones in which the usual red suits of hearts and diamonds are instead
black, and the usual black suits are red? The answer is that such cards are seen as
normal cards. For example, a black 7 of diamonds will reliably be seen as either a
normal (black) 7 of spades or as a normal (red) 7 of diamonds. The implication is
that, in this experiment, we see what we expect to see.
Kuhn and others use the results of this experiment as a sort of jumping off
point, suggesting that these results extend to much broader domains of “seeing.”
To again use a common example, suppose we have a small rock attached to a
string of, say, 1 meter in length, with the end of the string tied to a tree branch so
the rock can swing freely. Suppose we, while keeping the string taut, raise the rock
and then release it so that it swings freely.
Advocates of what I am calling different worlds incommensurability argue that
a scientist in the Aristotelian tradition will see in this case a natural object with an

25 Are (Some) Scientiﬁc Theories Incommensurable?

internal, goal-directed essential nature attempting to move toward its natural
place in the universe but with its motion inhibited by the string. In contrast, a
scientist in the Newtonian tradition will see a pendulum.
Again, and importantly, the claim is not that the Aristotelian scientist is
interpreting this in one way while the Newtonian scientist is interpreting it in
another way. Rather, the claim is that the Aristotelian is seeing one thing, the
Newtonian another.
The view extends beyond individual examples such as rocks attached to strings,
and applies, it is argued, much more broadly. As an Aristotelian, I would look out
my window right now – it is fall in New England – and see a world teeming with
goal-directed changes, changes originating from the trees and squirrels and deer
actualizing potencies that exist in them as a result of their essential, internal,
teleological natures. As a Newtonian, and one trained primarily in biology, I
would look out my window and see a world behaving in a push-pull, mechanistic
sort of way, with that behavior governed by external, quantitative physical,
chemical, biological principles – chemical changes in the chlorophyll of the
leaves that are governed by quantitative biochemical principles being the cause of
changing colors, and so on.
As noted earlier, this sort of broader incommensurability, with members of
different scientiﬁc traditions inhabiting different worlds, is much more contro­
versial than other forms of incommensurability. And even advocates of this sort of
incommensurability tend to agree that arguments that are broadly convincing are
difﬁcult to come by. Certainly in some cases (for example, the anomalous playing
cards case) we do, in an important sense, see parts of the world in a way strongly
conditioned by our backgrounds. Whether this sort of effect on how we see things
extends more broadly, in the way suggested by advocates of different worlds
incommensurability, is a much more contentious issue.

Discussion: Incommensurability and Scientiﬁc Progress
The main focus of this ﬁnal section is to explore, admittedly brieﬂy, a central
alleged implication of incommensurability. This particular implication involves
the question of whether incommensurability entails that there can be no
important sense whereby we can say there is genuine progress in science. The
issues involved are probably the most complex and contentious of any issues
surrounding incommensurability. A great deal has been written on this, but
nothing close to a consensus has emerged.
It has been argued that accepting incommensurability, especially terminologi­
cal and methodological incommensurability, entails that there is no way to
adequately compare different scientiﬁc theories. And, if we cannot adequately
compare competing theories, for example Newtonian physics and the more
recent relativistic physics, then there can be no uniform, principled criteria by
which we can claim that one theory is better than the other. Thus theory choice –
say preferring relativistic physics over Newtonian physics – is at bottom not based
on any rational criteria. In short, the claim is that accepting incommensurability
entails that theory choice is not a rational process.

227

228

Recent Developments

Closely related to this is the claim that there can be no meaningful sense of progress
in science. Given the considerations in the above paragraph, theory change – for
example, the change from Aristotelian physics to Newtonian physics, or from
Newtonian physics to relativistic physics – is not a matter of science making
progress toward some goal, perhaps toward some ideal scientiﬁc theory. Rather,
theory change begins to look more like a replacement of one tradition with
another tradition, with the new tradition focusing on different questions and
using different methodologies. In short, the claim is that there is no meaningful
sense of progress involved when we move from one tradition to another. Rather,
we are merely replacing one tradition with a different, incomparable tradition.
Incommensurability does, at least on the face of it, seem incompatible with one
view of scientiﬁc progress (though I should note that even this is contentious).
Consider the view that progress in science consists of a type of linear progression,
where successive scientiﬁc traditions are seen as moving toward and converging
on an ideal science, and moving closer to and converging on “the truth.”
We ﬁrst saw in Chapters 1 and 2 some misconceptions involving common
views of the relation between facts, truth, and science. Here we can see that in
addition to the considerations we looked at in those chapters, if scientiﬁc
traditions are incommensurable, then this conception of scientiﬁc progress –
the conception of progress as moving in a linear way toward some ideal theory –
seems like it cannot be correct, or at the very least is problematic. Methodological
incommensurability in particular entails that different traditions, such as the
Aristotelian and the Newtonian, are not even addressing the same questions,
much less speaking the same language. Given this, it is difﬁcult to see how they
could be directed toward the same goal, if directed at any goal at all.
But this does not mean that incommensurability is incompatible with any
meaningful sense of progress in science. In what follows I will not attempt an
extensive listing of all the alternative senses of scientiﬁc progress compatible with
incommensurability that have been explored. Rather, I will outline only one such
sense.
Let’s begin with an uncontroversial observation, namely, that incommensurability
does not imply that there are no meaningful ways to make comparisons. Consider a
simple example: there is no question that the side and diagonal of a square are
incommensurable in the mathematical sense discussed earlier in this chapter. We
can, though, still compare the lengths of the side and diagonal of a square. One such
comparison is simple: for a square having a side 1 meter in length, the diagonal is a bit
less than one and a half times the length of the side. The side and diagonal may be
incommensurable, but that does not mean they cannot be compared.
Likewise, even if the Aristotelian and Newtonian traditions are incommensurable,
we can still, in some important ways, compare them. For example, consider an
instrumentalist point of view, especially one where we focus on the usefulness of
traditions. From this point of view, it seems safe to say that Newtonian physics is
preferable to Aristotelian physics. With Newtonian physics we can and have sent
people to the moon and rovers to Mars, we have been able to put into orbit and
maintain for a long period of time the International Space Station, and countless
other things that we could never have done with Aristotelian physics. Similarly, with
the newer relativistic physics we can do things we could never have done with

25 Are (Some) Scientiﬁc Theories Incommensurable?

Newtonian physics – our GPS (Global Positioning System) mapping and navigation
systems provide one such example among many. In short, a practical, instrumen­
talist-grounded view gives us one way to provide a sense of progress that seems
compatible with incommensurability. So while incommensurability does have
implications for views of scientiﬁc progress, we can see that incommensurability
does not rule out all meaningful senses of progress.
Whether there are deeper and more substantive notions of progress in science
that go beyond the practical account just outlined is a matter of debate. Issues
surrounding progress in science are as complex and contentious as any involving
incommensurability, and in this brief section I have tried to outline only the most
straightforward and least controversial concept of progress. As usual, suggestions
for pursuing these issues further can be found in the Chapter Notes.

Concluding Remarks
It is difﬁcult to overstate how much has been written on the subject of
incommensurability, as well as how much has been written on related issues
involving progress in science. As noted, issues surrounding incommensurability
are as complex and contentious as any involving the history and philosophy of
science. What is included above should give a sense of the basics of, and potential
implications of, incommensurability and, I would hope, provide enough of a
background for productive further explorations of these topics.

229

230

26
Introduction to Quantum Theory: Basic Empirical Facts
and the Mathematics of Quantum Theory
In previous chapters we explored the special and general theories of relativity, and
saw that these theories have interesting implications, primarily for views on the
nature of space and time and the nature of gravity. In this chapter we turn to
another important branch of modern physics, that being quantum theory. We will
soon see that recent discoveries involving quantum theory likewise have sub­
stantial implications.
Quantum theory is a slippery topic, and one that requires careful going if we are
to get an accurate overview. Our strategy will be to ﬁrst explain a key distinction
between (i) empirical facts involving “quantum entities,” (ii) quantum theory
itself, that is, the mathematical core of quantum theory, and (iii) issues related to
interpretations of quantum theory. After these three issues are clariﬁed, we will
then go on, in subsequent sections of this chapter, to explore (i) and (ii), saving (iii)
for a separate chapter.

Facts, Theory, and Interpretation
As noted above, in any nontechnical discussion of quantum theory, there are at
least three separate issues that need to be kept distinct, these being (i) the
quantum facts, that is, empirical facts involving quantum entities, (ii) quantum
theory itself, by which I will mean the mathematical core of quantum theory, and
(iii) interpretations of quantum theory, which largely involve philosophical
questions about what sort of reality could give rise to the quantum facts and
that, presumably, would be consistent with the mathematics of quantum theory.
Unfortunately, in popular, nontechnical discussions of quantum theory, as often
as not these issues come all mushed together. For example, it is not unusual to see
claims that quantum theory shows that western science and certain eastern
philosophies are converging on the same view of the universe. But this is a
mistake. Certain interpretations of quantum theory suggest such a convergence,
but the interpretation of a theory and the theory itself are issues that should be
kept separate. As one other example, it is likewise not unusual to see claims that
quantum theory shows that the universe is constantly splitting into multiple,
parallel universes. But again, certain interpretations of quantum theory suggest
this, but quantum theory itself does not.
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

26 Introduction to Quantum Theory

Issues surrounding quantum theory are admittedly complex. But if we
approach the subject slowly and carefully, we can arrive at a good – and
importantly, an accurate – overview of quantum theory and related issues.
Our ﬁrst step will be to describe brieﬂy the distinction between the three issues
mentioned above.
The quantum facts
When I speak of quantum facts, I mean simply empirical facts involving quantum
entities. Such facts would include the outcome of experiments involving elec­
trons, neutrons, protons, and other subatomic particles; experiments involving
photons, that is, “units” of light; experiments involving particles (for example,
alpha and beta particles) emitted during radioactive decay, and so on.
As we will see later in this chapter, these facts are surprising, but they are not
controversial. In particular, there is no disagreement on what these facts are.
There is substantial disagreement on how to interpret the facts, for example, on
what sort of reality could produce such unusual facts. But again, issues involving
interpretation need to be kept separate from accounts of the quantum facts
themselves.
Before moving on, two items are worth brieﬂy noting. First, I am leaving
intentionally vague what precisely counts as a quantum entity. The entities
mentioned above – subatomic particles such as electrons, protons and the
like, photons, and particles involved in radioactive decay – are clearly quantum
entities. So in most of the upcoming discussion, the quantum facts we discuss will
be facts about such entities. But keep in mind that all objects – you, me, our desks
and chairs, and so on – are composed of these smaller entities, but that whether
ordinary-sized objects should be considered quantum entities is a point of some
dispute. Hence, in what follows I will emphasize mainly quantum facts that
involve uncontroversial quantum entities, such as those mentioned above.
Second, it is common to use the word “particle” to speak of quantum entities such
as photons, electrons, entities emitted during radioactive decay, and the like. And
indeed, in some contexts quantum entities act as if they are particles. But as we will
see shortly, in other contexts quantum entities act as if they are waves. As it turns
out, neither “particle” nor “wave” is quite right when speaking of quantum entities. I
will continue, as is standard, to use the word “particle,” but nothing should be read
into this with respect to the question of what quantum entities really are.
Quantum theory itself
Quantum theory, like much of physics since the 1600s, is a mathematically based
theory, and when I speak of “quantum theory itself,” I primarily have in mind the
mathematics at the heart of quantum theory. The key mathematical components
of quantum theory were discovered in the late 1920s, and that mathematics is
used much as the mathematics in other branches of physics is used. Most notably,
the mathematics of quantum theory is used to predict and explain phenomena
involving quantum entities, including the sorts of quantum facts mentioned
above.

231

232

Recent Developments

As a ﬁnal brief point, the mathematics of quantum theory has been enormously
successful. The mathematics of quantum theory has been around in roughly the
same form for over 80 years, and it has yet to make an incorrect prediction. With
respect to prediction and explanation, quantum theory is arguably the most
successful theory we have ever had.
Interpretations of quantum theory
The interpretation of quantum theory is essentially a philosophical topic centered
around the nature of reality. In particular, the various interpretations of quantum
theory center around the question of what sort of reality is consistent with both the
quantum facts and quantum theory itself. That is, presumably the quantum facts are
the result of some sort of reality “out there,” and given the success of the mathematics
of quantum theory in predicting and explaining these facts, it is not unreasonable to
think that the mathematics is in some way touching base with that reality. The
interpretation question, then, is what sort of reality, consistent with the known facts
and with the mathematics of quantum theory, could be producing those facts?
In the following sections we will look more closely at some basic quantum facts
and the mathematics of quantum theory, and in the next chapter we will turn to
an exploration of various reality issues, most notably the so-called measurement
problem, and various interpretations of quantum theory. As noted, the quantum
facts, quantum theory itself, and issues involving the interpretation of quantum
theory are easy to conﬂate, and doing so can (and does) lead to serious confusions
and misunderstandings about issues surrounding quantum theory, as well as to
confusions and misunderstandings about potential implications of quantum
theory. In what follows, I cannot encourage you too much to keep clear on
the distinction between the quantum facts, quantum theory itself, and the
interpretation of quantum theory.

Some Quantum Facts
In this section, we look at some reasonably straightforward empirical results of
experiments involving quantum entities such as electrons, photons, and the like.
The experiments described below, or ones similar to them, are commonly used to
convey some of the oddness associated with quantum facts. These experiments
primarily involve electrons and photons. Electrons are components of atoms, and
can easily be produced by an electron gun. Electron guns are devices that produce
a stream of electrons, and such devices are common. For example, the bulky
older-style televisions and computer monitors (not ﬂat-screen models) have an
electron gun in the back, and the image on the screen is produced by guiding the
electrons produced by this gun to appropriate locations on the screen. Photons,
on the other hand, are “units” of light, and of course can be produced by any
number of means, such as ﬂashlights.
For ease of discussion, I want to move away, for a moment, from consideration
of just quantum facts, that is, mere outcomes of experiments, and take a brief
excursion into a reality discussion. Note this will brieﬂy take us into issues

26 Introduction to Quantum Theory

involving interpretation, but doing so will make the ensuing discussion easier. We
will quickly return to a straightforward consideration of just the facts.
A brief excursion into a reality issue
As we will see in a minute, some experimental outcomes involving quantum
entities are most consistent with the view that quantum entities are waves, while
some experimental outcomes are most consistent with the view that quantum
entities are particles. Suppose we consider the reality question: Are electrons,
photons, and the like really particles, or are they really waves?
First, take a moment to consider the fact that waves and particles are quite
different. Consider particles ﬁrst. A baseball is a good example. Particles are
discrete objects, with reasonably well-deﬁned locations in space and time.
Particles interact with one another in typical particle-like ways, for example,
by bouncing off one another, or perhaps by breaking into smaller particles.
A wave, on the other hand, is better viewed as a phenomenon rather than as a
discrete object, and waves are typically spread out over a fairly large region, rather
than being conﬁned to a relatively small, well-deﬁned location in space and time.
A wave at a beach, for example, is not located in one particular location, but rather
is spread out over a large area. Moreover, waves interact with one another in quite
different ways than do particles. Two waves will sometimes interact with one
another so as to form a larger wave; sometimes two waves will interact in such a
way as to essentially cancel one another out; and sometimes two waves will pass
through one another, emerging unchanged from the interaction.
In keeping with the different nature of particles and waves, the two produce
very different experimental effects. So one would think that determining whether
electrons are particles or waves would be relatively easy. For example, suppose we
use a source that provides a steady stream of particles, say, a paintball gun (these
are guns that shoot small pellets containing paint, with the paint marking where
the pellets hit). Suppose moreover that we shoot a steady stream of paintballs
toward two small open windows. If we ask “What sort of pattern of hits will we
expect?” the answer is easy. Many of the paintballs will hit the wall containing the
windows, and those that pass through the windows will pile up on the inside wall,
behind the windows. That is, we should expect to see a pattern of hits, on the
inside wall, that correspond to where the windows are located.
Likewise, suppose for a moment that electrons are particles, and that we shoot
thousands of electrons at a barrier with two slits, with a piece of photographic
paper on the far side of the slits. Just as when we shot paintballs toward the two
windows, if electrons are particles, then many of the electrons will hit the barrier,
but those that pass through should hit the photographic paper in the areas behind
the slits. Electrons can be recorded on photographic paper, so in this case we
should expect to record what looks like thousands of individual particle hits, piled
up on areas of the photographic paper behind the two slits. (Incidentally,
photographic paper will not directly record electrons, but when coupled with
a phosphor screen, which emits light when struck by electrons, photographic
paper works well as an electron detector. For ease of discussion, we will continue
to speak of the photographic paper itself as recording the electrons.)

233

234

Recent Developments

Figure 26.1 Electrons as particles.

Pictorially, this scenario would look like Figure 26.1. Importantly, do not
overlook the fact that this picture is going well beyond the mere facts. In
particular, since we cannot detect or otherwise observe electrons before they
interact with some sort of measuring device, such as a piece of photographic
paper, the depiction of the electrons between the electron gun and the paper is an
interpretation, and not any sort of straightforward empirical fact. Again, this is a
picture, an interpretation, of what reality is presumably like if electrons are
particles. Keeping that in mind, Figure 26.1 is a picture of this scenario.
Notice the piling up pattern of electrons on the photographic paper. Again, this
is what we would expect if electrons are particles, and this piling up pattern is
what we will refer to as the “particle effect.”
On the other hand, suppose electrons are waves, and suppose we again pass
them through the same apparatus, with two slits and photographic paper. In this
case, the two slits will split the wave into two waves. These two waves will then
interact with one another, and the result will be a typical interference pattern
produced by the interaction of two waves. In this particular case, we would expect
the interaction of the waves to produce alternating light and dark bands on the
photographic paper, with the light and dark bands indicating the areas where the
waves reinforced one another, and areas where the waves canceled each other.
Such interference patterns are well known, having been studied as far back as the
early 1800s.
So if electrons are waves, the two-slit apparatus should produce an effect
similar to that shown in Figure 26.2. Once again, I emphasize that such waves
cannot be directly observed, and so the picture is again an interpretation of what
the underlying reality might be like. With that in mind, Figure 26.2, which I will
refer to as the “wave effect,” is what we should expect if electrons are waves.
In short, if electrons are particles, they should produce one sort of outcome, the
particle effect, and if electrons are waves, they should produce a quite different
sort of outcome, the wave effect. The particle effect and wave effect are
summarized in Figure 26.3.

26 Introduction to Quantum Theory

Figure 26.2 Electrons as waves.

We will now move on to describe a few experiments involving electrons. At this
point, we are returning from our brief excursion into interpretative/reality issues,
and will now simply describe the facts. That is, in the remainder of this section, we
will describe some experimental setups involving quantum entities, and describe
the results of those experiments.
Four experiments
The experiments described below are fairly standard examples, widely used to
illustrate some of the puzzling features of quantum facts. The ﬁrst experiment is
that pictured in Figure 26.1 and 26.2 above. That is, we take an electron gun, shoot
electrons at a barrier with two slits, and record the results on a piece of
photographic paper.
Given this experimental setup, the outcome is a clear wave effect. That is, the
photographic paper will have on it alternating dark and light bands. One more
time, note again the sense in which this is a straightforward quantum fact. We are
describing nothing more than straightforward observational results: if one sets up
Figure 26.3 The particle effect and the wave
effect.

235

236

Recent Developments

a basic two slit apparatus, as described above, the result is a piece of photographic
paper with alternating dark and light bands.
For experiment 2, let’s modify the ﬁrst experiment slightly. In particular,
suppose we have a setup exactly as for the ﬁrst experiment, except that we
will include passive electron detectors to monitor each of the slits. That is, behind
the top slit we put one electron detector, which we will call detector A, which will
record any electron passing through that top slit. Next to the other slit we will
place a second detector, which we will call detector B, which will monitor that
bottom slit. The setup, then, looks as shown in Figure 26.4.
Here is the idea behind including the detectors: if electrons are waves, then the
wave should pass through both slits simultaneously, and hence both detectors
should always ﬁre simultaneously, and it should never happen that only one or the
other detector ﬁres by itself. If, on the other hand, electrons are particles, then
each will at most pass through one or the other slit, and hence only one detector at
a time should register the presence of an electron, and they should never ﬁre
simultaneously.
Recall that, in experiment 1, the result was a clear wave effect. The experiment we
are considering now is exactly like experiment 1, except for the presence of the
detectors. Since the detectors are passive detectors – that is, we would not expect
them to interfere with the electron, but merely note whether an electron is present –
our initial inclination would be to expect this experiment to also result in a wave
effect. But instead, the result of this experiment is a clear particle effect. And in
keeping with this, only one detector at a time ﬁres. The detectors never register
electrons in both slits simultaneously, as would be expected if electrons were waves.
It is as if, in the presence of detectors, the electrons are acting as particles.
Moreover, suppose we hook up an on/off switch – say, something like a light
switch – to the electron detectors, so that we can turn them on and off whenever
we wish. We’ll then be able to switch between the wave effect and the particle
effect by simply moving the switch to the on or off position. When off, we will see
the wave effect, and when on, the particle effect, and we can instantly change

Figure 26.4 Two slit experiment with electron detectors.

26 Introduction to Quantum Theory

between the two, as often and as rapidly as we wish, by merely moving the switch
back and forth.
These results are surprising, because it is difﬁcult to imagine how such
detectors could so substantially alter the outcome of the experiment. But again,
this is just a fact about experiments involving quantum entities – if the experi­
ment is set up as described in experiment 1, a wave effect is the result. And if we
add electron detectors as in experiment 2, the outcome is a particle effect. And, as
described above, we can switch between a wave effect and a particle effect by
merely turning the detectors off or on.
For experiment 3, we will use a photon gun rather than an electron gun. A
photon gun is a device that produces “units” of light. We will set the
experiment up with a beam splitter (which is essentially just a partially
silvered mirror), a beam recombiner (essentially just a two-way mirror),
two normal mirrors, and a piece of photographic paper to record the results.
Once again, we will put two photon detectors into the setup, but for experi­
ment 3, we will have the detectors turned off. In summary, the experimental
setup looks as shown in Figure 26.5.
Here is the idea behind this experiment: suppose the photon is a wave. The
photon gun emits the wave toward the beam splitter, which splits the wave into
two waves. One wave continues straight, toward the mirror in the upper right of
the diagram, and the other wave is reﬂected down, toward the mirror in the lower
left. The mirrors reﬂect the wave, which recombine at the beam recombiner,
which also directs the wave toward the photographic paper. Since there are two
waves in this situation, they will interfere and produce a wave interference
pattern, that is, a wave effect, on the paper.

Figure 26.5 Beam splitter experiment.

237

238

Recent Developments

On the other hand, if photons are particles, then each photon will travel either
through the upper/right route or through the lower/left route. Here there are no
waves to interfere, and hence we would expect a particle effect.
Although we have included photon detectors in the diagram, for experiment 3
these detectors are turned off and hence play no role. And when we run this
experiment, the result is a clear wave effect, as if photons were waves.
For experiment 4, we will use the exact same setup as experiment 3, except that
we will turn the detectors on. By this point you can probably guess, correctly, that
something odd happens if we turn the detectors on. Again, these detectors are
presumably playing a passive role as did the detectors in experiment 2. And again,
if photons are waves, as the previous experiment suggests, then we would expect
both detectors to ﬁre simultaneously. After all, experiment 3 suggests that
photons are waves, and hence a wave should be present at both detectors
simultaneously.
But only one or the other detector goes off at a time, which is what we would
expect if photons were particles, not waves. And the result on the photographic
paper, in spite of the fact that this experiment is almost identical to the previous
experiment, is a clear particle effect.
And exactly as with experiment 2, we can hook up an on/off switch to the
detectors, and switch whenever we wish between the wave effect and the particle
effect by merely turning the detectors off or on. Let’s take a minute to think about
how odd this seems. It seems, in experiment 3, that we could only get these results
if photons really are waves. And it seems, for experiment 4, that we could only get
these results if photons really are particles.
These are only four experimental results out of thousands we could consider.
But these four should sufﬁce to convey some of the oddness of the quantum facts.
Before closing this subsection, let me offer two more brief considerations.
First, here is a rough guide to predicting the outcome of experiments involving
quantum entities. When a detection or measurement of a quantum entity is made,
what will be detected seems to be a particle. That is, it is as if, when detected,
quantum entities are particles. But when not being detected or measured,
quantum entities seem to behave as if they are waves. So as a rough guide to
predicting the outcome of experiments, ask when the ﬁrst measurement or
detection is made. In experiment 1, the ﬁrst measuring device is the photographic
paper. Before this measurement, think of the quantum entity as behaving as if it
were a wave. Since no detection is made until after the slits, it will be as if there is
wave interference and hence we would expect the interference pattern typical of
the wave effect. On the other hand, in experiment 2, the ﬁrst measurement takes
place at the detectors, before there is a chance for wave interference. And so on for
the other experiments.
Be careful not to misunderstand my point in the above paragraph. I am not
saying that quantum entities really are particles when detected, and really are
waves when not detected. Rather, I am being agnostic as to what is really going on,
and merely offering a rough guide to predicting the outcome of such experiments.
Treat quantum entities as if they are particles when detected, and as if they are
waves when not being detected, and you will have a way of anticipating the
outcomes of experiments such as those above.

26 Introduction to Quantum Theory

As a second but related consideration, notice that acts of measurement or
detection seem to play a curious role when quantum entities are involved. For
example, the electron and photon detectors in the above experiments are
measuring devices that measure the presence of an electron or photon. Such
measuring devices seem to affect what happens, for example, whether we see a
wave or particle effect. And this is very puzzling. How could an electron, photon,
or other quantum entity “know” whether there is a detector or other measure­
ment device nearby? And for that matter, what exactly counts as a measurement?
These are very difﬁcult questions, and are part of what is often referred to as the
measurement problem. We will explore the measurement problem in the next
chapter, but for now, I just wanted to introduce these issues about measurements,
and the curious role measurements play in quantum theory.

Overview of the Mathematics of Quantum Theory
The mathematics of quantum theory is sufﬁciently difﬁcult as to make it
impossible, in a text such as this, to present it in any detail while at the same
time remaining accurate and comprehensible. But while it may be impossible to
explain here the details of the mathematics of quantum theory, it is not
particularly difﬁcult to give a good idea of what that mathematics is like, all
the while remaining accurate and accessible.
My strategy will be to describe the mathematics in two separate, though
overlapping, ways. I will begin with a section providing a very general descriptive
overview of the mathematics of quantum theory. I will then provide a section that
is still fairly general and descriptive, although with a sizeable amount more detail.
For those wishing more detail yet, in the Chapter Notes at the end of this book is a
section providing yet more detail.
Descriptive overview of the mathematics of quantum theory
Quantum theory is, at bottom, a “wave” sort of mathematics, as distinguished
from a particle sort of math. A few notes on wave math versus particle math may
be helpful.
In physics, we ﬁnd both “particle” mathematics and “wave” mathematics. By
this I mean simply that a certain type of mathematics is used when the situation
involves discrete objects (“particles”), and another type of mathematics is used
when the situation involves waves. For example, if we drop a bowling ball off the
roof of a building, the object involved is a discrete object (the ball) seemingly
under the inﬂuence of various forces (gravitational forces, for example). The
mathematics appropriate for this situation would be an example of what I am
referring to as particle mathematics.
Waves, however, differ from particles (some of the key differences were
discussed above), and hence the math appropriate for particles is not appropriate
for situations involving waves. There are, however, well-established mathematics
for dealing with waves. And in physics, wave mathematics is used just as particle
mathematics is used. In particular, wave mathematics allows us to make

239

240

Recent Developments

predictions about what attributes of a system we will detect (for example, the
amount of energy a wave is carrying), as well as how the system will evolve over
time (for example, where the crest of the wave will be located at a future time).
Again, quantum theory is a wave sort of mathematics. But as mentioned, there
is nothing unusual about this. Wave mathematics are everywhere in physics, and
quantum theory is simply a particular version of a type of mathematics with which
physicists are well acquainted.
There is one common question I want to address before ending this section, but
otherwise, this concludes this very general descriptive overview of the mathe­
matics of quantum theory. In summary, the math of quantum theory is a wave sort
of mathematics, and the mathematics of quantum theory is used in the same way
that other mathematics is used in physics. In particular, given the current state of
a system, one can use the mathematics of quantum theory to make predictions
about what attributes of the system might be observed, and to make predictions
about what state the system will be in at a future time.
If the mathematics of quantum theory is a familiar sort of wave mathematics, why do
we often hear that quantum theory is such an unusual theory?

One can easily get the impression, from various writings on quantum theory, that
quantum theory is somehow profoundly different from past theories in physics.
Indeed, viewed a certain way, I think this sentiment is correct. For example, issues
surrounding quantum theory force us to rethink some of the basic assumptions
we have had about the world ever since the time of the ancient Greeks. But given
that the mathematics of quantum theory is a familiar sort of wave mathematics, in
what sense is quantum theory different from other theories in physics?
One minor difference, though one worth mentioning, is that the mathematics
of quantum theory usually provides probabilistic predictions rather than deﬁnite
predictions. For example, if we use the mathematics of quantum theory to predict,
say, the position of an electron, the mathematics will provide us with the
probability of detecting the electron at various positions. In contrast, in the
case of the bowling ball dropped from the roof, the mathematics will provide us
with a deﬁnite prediction. In short, the predictions of other branches of physics
tend to be deﬁnite (“the ball will be detected in this location”), whereas the
predictions of quantum theory are typically probabilistic (“there is such and such
a probability of detecting the electron at this location”).
But this is a fairly minor difference with other branches of physics. The major
difference I have in mind concerns the interpretation of the mathematics. Since
issues involving interpretation are a central topic of the next chapter, I will discuss
it only brieﬂy here.
The ﬁrst point to note is this: the mathematics used in physics is, at bottom, just
mathematics. As such, the mathematics has no necessary or inherent ties to the
world. This is a point that is easy to overlook, but is central in understanding the
sense in which quantum theory is an unusual theory. To understand this better,
consider again a simple case such as the dropped bowling ball. In the mathematics
used to make predictions about the falling ball, there is nothing that requires that
chunk of mathematics to be interpreted as being about a falling object. The
equation used is just an equation, just a piece of mathematics, just a collection of

26 Introduction to Quantum Theory

symbols joined together and manipulated according to the rules of the mathe­
matics involved.
The fact is we interpret that chunk of mathematics in a certain way (for
example, as being about a falling ball), and such interpretations have been
extremely fruitful and useful (useful, for example, for making predictions). In
addition, we tend to interpret the chunk of mathematics involving the falling ball
in more or less the same way. For example, there is general agreement that this
part of the equation represents the falling ball, this part of the equation represents
time, this part represents the starting location of the ball, and so on. In short, there
is general agreement on how that equation describes, or “paints a picture of,” the
situation involving the falling ball.
In cases such as the equation involved with the falling ball, it is precisely the fact
that we tend to agree on the interpretation that disguises the fact that we are even
making an interpretation. In other words, we are indeed interpreting the math,
but we all interpret it the same way, and have done so for several hundred years.
As a result, we tend not to recognize that using mathematics to make predictions
about the world requires that we interpret the math as being about the world. But
at bottom, the way we tie up the math with the world is not an inherent part of the
mathematics; rather, it is an interpretation of the mathematics.
Immediately above, I tried to draw attention to the fact that there is general
agreement on how to tie up the mathematics involved with the falling ball with the
world. (“This part of the equation represents the ball,” and so on.) This is exactly
where a major difference with the mathematics of quantum theory arises: there is
no consensus on how to tie up the mathematics involved in quantum theory with
the world.
I need to be careful here so as not to be misunderstood. Consider an example
where quantum theory is used to make a prediction about the location of an
electron. Almost everyone agrees that the mathematics involved does tie up with
the world, at least in a very general sense. For example, most agree that there are
such things as electrons, that electrons can inﬂuence objects we consider to
be measuring devices we use to record the position of electrons, and that the
mathematics of quantum theory enable us to make predictions about how
those measuring devices will behave in certain situations involving electrons.
So in these very general terms, almost all agree that the mathematics of quantum
theory does indeed “tie up” with things such as electrons and measuring devices.
If one tries to go beyond this general level, the “picture” of reality suggested by
the mathematics of quantum theory seems to be a thoroughly bizarre picture. The
sense in which the picture is bizarre will be explored more fully in the next
chapter. So for now, I will simply leave it at that: the picture is a bizarre one, and
that is why one often hears that quantum theory is such a strange theory.
In closing this section, it is worth emphasizing once again that the mathematics
of quantum theory is not at all strange; rather, the strangeness arises in the
interpretation of that mathematics. And, incidentally, this is a good place to recall
a point made earlier in this text (from the discussion on instrumentalism and
realism in Chapter 8). One need not do this sort of interpretation at all. That is,
taking an instrumentalist attitude toward a theory – in this case, quantum
theory – is a common and respectable attitude. In the case of quantum theory,

241

242

Recent Developments

an instrumentalist attitude would amount to taking the following stance: we have
the mathematics of quantum theory; we have experts highly proﬁcient in the use
of that mathematics; that mathematics allows us to make highly accurate and
reliable predictions. Who could ask for anything more?
A somewhat more detailed, but still descriptive, overview of the
mathematics of quantum theory
As described above, the mathematics of quantum theory is a wave sort of
mathematics. Let’s begin this section with a few facts about waves and wave
mathematics.
First, a fairly unremarkable fact, though one you may not have thought about
explicitly: waves come in families. For example, the waves produced by stringed
instruments (for example, guitars and banjos) have similarities not shared by
waves produced by reed instruments (for example, clarinets and saxophones),
which in turn have similarities not shared by waves produced by percussion
instruments (for example, bass and bongo drums). This is not much different
from the fact that you and other members of your family have similarities not
shared by myself and other members of my family. In short, we can group waves
into families.
Given that waves come in families, it is not surprising that the mathematics that
apply to waves can likewise be grouped into families. Suppose, then, that
Figure 26.6 represents the various families of wave mathematics.
In Figure 26.6, the family icons at the left represent the families of waves, which
I will simply refer to as family A, B, C, D, and so on. This is similar to the way that
your last name might represent your entire family. The icons to the right of the
equal signs represent the individual members of each family, which I will refer to
as a1, a2, a3, and so on. And again, this is similar to the way that your name, and
the names of your parents, sisters, and brothers, might represent the individual
members of your family.
Now, in contrast to the unremarkable fact that waves come in families, here is a
quite surprising fact: any particular wave can be produced by adding together
appropriate members of any family of waves. For example, take a particular wave,
say, one produced by plucking the top string of a guitar. Suppose Figure 26.7
represents the equation that characterizes this wave.
Now, pick any family from the chart of families in Figure 26.6, let’s say family A.
There will be members of family A such that, when those members are added
together, they will produce the wave in question. That is, this wave can be
produced by adding together appropriate members of family A. Schematically,
this would look as shown in Figure 26.8.
Notably, that same wave equation can be produced by adding together
appropriate members of any other family. So, for example, there will be appro­
priate members of family C that can be added together to produce the same wave
equation, as shown in Figure 26.9.
And in general, any given wave can be produced by adding together appropriate
members of any given family of waves. As mentioned, this is a rather remarkable
fact about waves, and one that has been extensively studied and has proven quite

26 Introduction to Quantum Theory

Figure 26.6 Families of wave mathematics.

Figure 26.7 Representation of a wave equation.

Figure 26.8 Adding family members to produce a particular wave.

Figure 26.9 Members of another family can produce the same wave.

243

244

Recent Developments

fruitful over the past century. It is, for example, this fact that makes it possible to
reproduce music on electronic devices. (Think about it: Isn’t it rather astounding
that the almost exact sounds of guitars, drums, horns, and so on, can be produced
by small electronic devices that have almost nothing in common with guitars,
drums, or horns? The key to how this works is in the above facts about waves. In
outline, the waves produced by, say, the earbuds you use to listen to music form a
family of waves, and thus, because of the facts above, any wave of a guitar,
trumpet, human voice, or whatever, can be produced by adding together
appropriate members of the “earbud” family of waves.)
At bottom, this one unremarkable fact (that waves come in families), and the
one remarkable fact (that any given wave can be produced by adding together
appropriate members of any given family), are all the facts needed to get a better
idea of the way the mathematics of quantum theory work. The last task of this
section, then, is to explain how to relate these facts about wave mathematics to
quantum theory.
The relation between these facts about wave mathematics and quantum theory
can be stated quite brieﬂy, although explaining this clearly will take a bit more
work. Here is a summary of the bottom line:
1) A state of a quantum system is represented by a particular piece of wave
mathematics, usually called the wave function for that system.
2) Each type of measurement one might perform on a quantum system is
associated with a particular family of waves.
3) Predictions about the outcome of a measurement on the quantum system are
arrived at by ﬁnding the members of the family of waves (the family associated
with that measurement) that, when added together, produce the wave
function.
Let’s work on unpacking what this means, beginning with an explanation of (1)
above. Consider a quantum system, say a particular electron in a particular
setting. In a way similar to the way a wave produced by a guitar string can be
represented by a particular piece of wave mathematics, so too the electron in this
particular setting can be represented by a piece of wave mathematics. Again, this
piece of mathematics is called the wave function for this system.
Let’s suppose the wave function for the electron is as shown in Figure 26.10. So
understanding (1) is relatively straightforward. A quantum system, such as an
electron in a particular setting, can be represented by a wave function.
Understanding (2) is a bit more involved, but still fairly straightforward.
Recall there are families of waves, and that the mathematics associated with
waves also comes in families. In the mathematics of quantum theory, each such
family is associated with a particular type of measurement. For example, the
position of an electron is one measurement one might perform on the electron
mentioned above. And among the various families of wave mathematics, one

Figure 26.10 Representation of the wave function for an electron in a
particular setting.

26 Introduction to Quantum Theory

family will be associated with measurements of position. Another family will be
associated with measurements of the momentum of the electron, another
family with the spin of the electron, and so on for the various possible
measurements we might perform on the electron. In short, as stated in (2),
each family of wave mathematics is associated with a possible measurement one
might perform on a quantum system.
Pictorially, this would look as shown in Figure 26.11. The ﬁgure shows only
three types of measurements, but there are actually inﬁnitely many types of
measurements one might perform on a quantum system. And as suggested by
Figure 26.11, and described in (2) above, each such measurement will be
associated with a particular wave family. (Incidentally, I’ve chosen the easy to
remember P, M, and S, but it should be noted that these are not the standard
abbreviations used by physicists to represent position, momentum, and spin.)
Understanding (3) is probably the trickiest part of this story. Let’s approach this
by way of example. Suppose we have a particular electron in a particular situation,
and we want to make predictions about what will happen if we perform a
measurement on the position of the electron. For simplicity, suppose for this
example there are only two possible locations where the electron might be found.
Now, from (1) we know that there is a wave function associated with that electron
(see Figure 26.12) and from (2) we know that, among the various families
of mathematics associated with waves, there will be one family, let’s say this is
family P, that is associated with measurements of position (see Figure 26.13).
Now recall the remarkable fact above, that appropriate members of any wave
family can be added together to produce any particular wave function. So in
particular, there will be appropriate members of family P that, when added
together, produce the wave function for the electron. Let’s suppose that p8 and
p11 are the members of family P that add together to produce the wave function
for the electron. Schematically, this is shown in Figure 26.14.

Figure 26.11 Families associated with measurements.

245

246

Recent Developments

Figure 26.12 Wave function for electron.

Figure 26.13 Family P associated with measurements of position.

Figure 26.14 Wave function decomposed
into members of family P.

With this information in mind, we are in a position to explain (3). Recall that we
are interested in making a prediction about the position of the electron, that P is
the family associated with measurements of position, and that p8 and p11 are the
members of P that add together to produce the wave function that represents the
electron.
These two family members, p8 and p11, will enable us to make the desired
predictions. In this example, there were two areas where the electron might be
found. As it turns out, some straightforward and standard mathematical manip­
ulation of p8 will result in a number between 0 and 1, and this number represents
the probability of ﬁnding the electron in the ﬁrst area. Likewise, the same
straightforward mathematical manipulation of p11 will also result in a number
between 0 and 1, and this number represents the probability of ﬁnding the
electron in the second area. This, then, is how p8 and p11 lead to the predictions
about the position of the electron.
(It is not crucial for understanding this discussion, but if you are curious, here is
an overview of the mathematical manipulation just mentioned: p8 is a piece of
wave mathematics associated with a particular wave. All waves have amplitudes
associated with them, and so p8 will likewise have an amplitude associated with it.
The mathematical manipulation involves squaring the amplitude of p8. Because
of the nature of the mathematics involved, this will always result in a number
between 0 and 1. As mentioned, that number will represent the probability of
ﬁnding the electron in the ﬁrst area. Do likewise for p11 – that is, square the
amplitude associated with p11 – and that number will be the probability of ﬁnding
the electron in the second area.)
Thus, (1), (2), and (3) describe how the mathematics of quantum theory is used
to predict the probabilities of observing the possible outcomes of measurements
performed on quantum systems. In summary: (1) states of a quantum system are
represented by the wave function for that system; (2) wave families are associated
with types of measurements; and (3) the members of a family that add up to the
wave function allow us to make predictions concerning the outcomes of mea­
surements associated with that wave family.

26 Introduction to Quantum Theory

The evolution of states over time

Before closing this section, a brief note on the evolution of states over time is in
order. Thus far, we have only discussed the outcomes of measurements on a
quantum system in a given state. As noted, physics is generally concerned not only
with the outcome of measurements at a particular time, but also with predicting
the outcome of measurements we might make in the future.
In quantum theory, the evolution of a system over time is predicted by
Schrödinger’s equation. Recall from (1) above that the current state of a system
is represented by the wave function for that system. In very brief outline,
Schrödinger’s equation allows us to calculate, from the wave function represent­
ing the current state of the system, what state the system will be in at future times.
Schrödinger’s equation plays a role in many ways analogous to equations from
other branches of science. To return to the example of the ball dropped from the
roof of a building, within Newtonian physics there are well-known equations that
allow us not only to predict the outcome of measurements at the present time, but
also to predict how that system will change over time. In a way similar to how
these equations in Newtonian physics govern the evolution of states over time, in
quantum theory Schrödinger’s equation likewise governs the evolution of quan­
tum states over time.

Concluding Remarks
Early in the chapter we saw an overview of some basic quantum facts. There is no
question about what the empirical quantum facts are, though in a certain sense
they are odd facts. But their oddness stems more from a reality perspective; in
particular, the oddness emerges primarily when we try to imagine what sort of
underlying reality could give rise to these facts. As I’ve stressed from the outset,
the reality question, the interpretation issue, is an issue that needs to be kept
distinct from the issues discussed in this chapter. We turn to this in the next
chapter.
One ﬁnal note before closing. In the discussion of the mathematics above, I
have primarily stressed the way that the mathematics of quantum theory, at
bottom, performs much the same role as the mathematics we have had in physics
for hundreds of years. In particular, the mathematics of quantum theory, as
summarized in the sections above, allow us to predict the outcome of measure­
ments at a particular time, and via Schrödinger’s equation, allow us to predict
what state the system will be in at a future time.
But there is an important sense in which Schrödinger’s equation, in conjunc­
tion with what is often termed the projection postulate (discussed in the next
chapter), is used differently from equations found in other branches of science.
But this difference is best understood in the context of issues involving interpre­
tation/reality questions. In the next chapter we turn to a careful discussion of such
issues.

247

248

27
The Reality Question: The Measurement Problem and
Interpretations of Quantum Theory
In this chapter we explore two interrelated issues surrounding quantum theory.
We will look ﬁrst at what has come to be called the measurement problem. The
measurement problem is an issue that arises with quantum theory in a way that it
has never arisen with earlier scientiﬁc theories and, as it is closely tied to the
question of what is really going on in experiments and phenomena involving
quantum entities, it is a good topic to explore in a chapter such as this. In addition,
understanding the measurement problem will allow us to better understand
various issues and difﬁculties surrounding proposed interpretations of quantum
theory.

The Measurement Problem
There are a variety of ways to describe the measurement problem, with some
accounts being more technical in nature, some less so. In this section I want to
approach the problem in a way that is nontechnical but still conveys some of the
deeply puzzling aspects surrounding the role of measurement in quantum theory.
It will help to ﬁrst identify a feature of measurements that is, I think, generally not
widely appreciated.
A brief terminological point: in the remainder of this chapter when I speak of
the “standard approach to quantum theory,” I will have in mind the usual
approach to the mathematics of quantum theory, that is, the mathematics
described in the previous chapter. This is the mathematics that is found in
almost all textbooks and college-level courses (those courses aimed at physics
majors) on the subject, and the mathematics used primarily by physicists working
with systems involving quantum entities.
What is a measurement?
Consider a particular measuring device, say the sort of outdoor thermometer
commonly found on back porches. I have in mind here a sort of largish, roundfaced thermometer, with a dial pointing to numbers representing air tempera­
tures, with those numbers arranged around the perimeter of the face.
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

27 The Reality Question

Such a thermometer is a paradigm example of something we consider a
measuring device, in this case, one used to measure air temperature. In outline,
here is how this particular sort of measuring device works (or more precisely, how
one type of design works). Inside the housing, near the center, is a thin coiled strip
composed of two different types of metal (a bimetallic strip). The two types of
metal will expand and contract at different rates when warmed or cooled, and this
causes the coil to tighten or loosen as the air temperature gets cooler or warmer. If
we attach a pointer to the center of the coil, the changes in the coil will cause the
pointer to move. If we choose the right sorts of metals, and the right length, width,
and initial tension on the coil, and the right initial pointer position, we can get a
device where physical changes in it will cause the pointer to move reliably through
a range of numbers corresponding to air temperatures.
Now contrast this example with something we do not consider to be a
measuring device. Consider a piece of deck furniture, say a particular deck chair,
perhaps sitting next to the thermometer and having a metal frame with a fabric
seat and back.
Notice this chair will go through physical changes corresponding to air
temperature in much the same way the thermometer goes through physical
changes corresponding to air temperature. Just as the metal coil in the thermom­
eter expands and contracts due to air temperature, so also will the metal frame of
the chair expand and contract. And as changes in the coil in turn cause other
changes, such as the position of the dial, so too do the changes in the metal frame
cause other changes in the chair, such as a tightening or loosening of the fabric
composing the seat and back.
Importantly – and this is central in understanding a key aspect of the measure­
ment problem – there is no fundamental physical difference between the thermom­
eter and the chair. Both are, at bottom, just things in the world, just physical objects
undergoing physical changes as they interact with and respond to features of their
environment. But if there is no fundamental physical difference between these two
objects, a key question is this: Why do we consider one to be a measuring device and
the other not to be a measuring device?
It seems the only honest, accurate answer we can give is that the difference lies
in us. Certain things are of interest to us in ways others are not. I and others ﬁnd it
of interest to know the outside air temperature in the morning, so as, for example,
to choose suitable clothing for the day. Thus the physical changes in the device we
call a thermometer are of interest to me. In contrast, I cannot ﬁnd much reason to
be interested in the same sorts of physical changes taking place in the deck chair
located next to the thermometer.
Pause to think about other types of measuring devices, and notice that the same
point applies. Other than our interests, there is no fundamental difference
between, say, a wooden yardstick we use to measure lengths and an identical
wooden yardstick that is used to stir paint. In my shop I in fact have two such
yardsticks, one I’ve used for some years to measure lengths, and the other I’ve
used almost exclusively for stirring paint. In both contexts, the measuring context
and the paint-stirring context, in terms of their physical characteristics these
objects are essentially identical. Yet the one we consider to be a measuring device
and the other a paint stirrer.

249

250

Recent Developments

In general, there are no physical features of objects we consider to be measuring
devices that are at bottom any different from the physical features of objects we do
not consider to be measuring devices. Thus there seems to be no principled way, no
objective way that is independent of human interests, to distinguish objects we
consider measuring devices from objects we do not take to be measuring devices. As
we will see in a moment, in the past this has never been of any major consequence.
However, this aspect of measurements – that there seems to be no objective,
independent way to distinguish between measuring devices and nonmeasuring
devices, and that whether something is or is not a measuring device seems to
depend on us – comes importantly into play when considering the standard
approach to quantum theory. Before turning to the role measurement plays in
quantum theory, it will ﬁrst help to consider the role (or non-role) measurement
plays in other sciences, for example, Newtonian science.
The role of measurement in Newtonian science
Suppose we decide to drop an object, for example a baseball, off the roof of a
reasonably tall building. We know from Newtonian physics that once we drop the
ball, its acceleration (until it hits the ground) will be about 10 meters per second
per second. So for each additional second the ball is falling its velocity will increase
by about 10 meters per second. Thus, if we decide to make a measurement of the
velocity of the ball any time between releasing it and it hitting the ground,
Newtonian physics will tell us what to expect from that measurement. Likewise, if
we decide to measure the position of the ball between the time we release it and
the time it hits the ground, Newtonian physics will again tell us what to expect
from that measurement.
Importantly – and this also will be key in understanding the measurement
problem as it relates to quantum physics – in this example measurement plays no
role in what is happening. Maybe we choose to make a measurement of the ball’s
velocity at some point in its fall, or maybe we choose not to make such a
measurement. Whether we do or do not makes no difference in the evolution of
the system.
As such, measurements in Newtonian science and other branches of basic
sciences raise no particular problems or issues. This is simply because in such
theories, while measurements might tell us about something we are interested in,
measurements do not affect or inﬂuence those sciences’ account of how a system
evolves. In short, in our previous sciences and our current basic sciences other
than quantum theory, measurement plays no unusual role. Thus there are no
problematic issues raised by measurements, that is, there is no measurement
problem. But as you no doubt can guess, in the standard approach to quantum
theory measurement plays a different role. We turn now to that topic.
The role of measurement in quantum theory
At the end of the last chapter, we saw that within quantum theory the evolution of
states over time is governed by Schrödinger’s equation. That is, in a way analogous
to the way we can use the Newtonian equations discussed above to predict how a

27 The Reality Question

Figure 27.1 Beam splitter arrangement.

system involving a ball dropped from the roof of a building will evolve over time,
within quantum theory Schrödinger’s equation allows us to predict how a
quantum system will evolve over time.
Consider an experimental setup similar to some we discussed in the previous
chapter. In particular, suppose we have a photon gun capable of emitting single
photons. We send the photons toward a beam splitter, that is, a partially silvered
mirror that will reﬂect roughly half the photons that encounter it and will allow
about half to pass through. We will place two photon detectors after the beam
splitter, and for ease of discussion, let’s suppose the detectors beep whenever they
detect a photon. The setup is as pictured in Figure 27.1.
Suppose we have a button, and each time we press the button, a photon is
emitted toward the beam splitter. There is no question about what we seem to
observe in this case: each time we press the button, we hear either detector A or
detector B beep, but never both at the same time. And moreover, over a long run
of button presses and photon detections, about 50% of the time we hear detector
A beep and about 50% of the time we hear detector B beep.
Let’s look more closely at how the standard mathematics of quantum theory
represents this setup. Just after the button is pressed, the state of the system is
represented by a wave function (this was discussed more thoroughly in the
previous chapter), in particular, a wave function that represents a wave moving
toward the beam splitter.
Immediately after the photon reaches the beam splitter, Schrödinger’s equation
represents the photon as being in what is termed a superposition of states. To say
the photon is represented as being in a superposition of states is to say that (in this
example at least) it is represented as being in sort of a combination of two
different states. In this case, the superposition consists of one state representing
the photon as a wave traveling toward detector A, with the other state repre­
senting the photon as a wave traveling toward detector B.
Superpositions are everywhere in the standard approach to quantum theory.
Generally speaking, any time there is a physical interaction that results in there

251

252

Recent Developments

being two or more possible states, such as is the case with the beam splitter setup,
Schrödinger’s equation will represent the situation as involving a superposition,
again a sort of combination, of those possible states.
With this in mind, let’s consider what the situation looks like once the photon
has had enough time to reach the detectors. Recall the discussion from above –
the photon detector is just a physical object not in principle different from other
physical objects, such as the beam splitter. So when a photon interacts with a
photon detector, at bottom this is just another physical interaction. And it is a
physical interaction that seems to result in two different possible states, but now
where one state consists of detector A beeping and the other state consists of
detector B beeping.
And indeed, Schrödinger’s equation, if left to run its course, would represent
the setup at this point as consisting of a superposition of states, but now a
superposition that consists of a sort of combination of detector A beeping and
detector B beeping.
If something is beginning to sound odd here, it should. Recall that we never
observe the detectors ﬁring simultaneously. Instead, we observe that either
detector A beeps or detector B beeps. So Schrödinger’s equation, on its own,
is representing the situation in a way that differs substantially from what we seem
to observe. So how does the standard approach handle this discrepancy between
our experience and what Schrödinger’s equation represents?
The standard approach to the mathematics of quantum theory handles this by
including an additional component, an additional basic postulate, beyond the
basic mathematical components discussed in the previous chapter. This addi­
tional component is generally referred to as the projection postulate (or, equally
commonly, as the collapse postulate).
The idea behind the projection postulate is that when we observe the outcome
of a measurement, we essentially insert whatever measurement outcome we
observe into the mathematics. In other words, when we observe a measurement
outcome we put an end to the continually evolving superpositions of states
represented by Schrödinger’s equation; we insert a wave function representing the
outcome we observed; and then (if the system is such that it will continue to
evolve) we restart Schrödinger’s equation and represent the system as evolving
according to that equation until, perhaps, another measurement takes place (in
which case we repeat the procedure).
A terminological note: this point in the mathematical representation of the
scenario – using the projection postulate, following a measurement, to put an end
to the superposition of states – is generally referred to as the “collapse of the wave
function,” or sometimes as the “reduction of the wave packet.” The phrasing
might suggest that the collapse of the wave function is viewed as an actual physical
event, something occurring at the micro level, and indeed some do speak that way.
But for our purposes, at this point it is better to think of this instrumentally, as a
convenient way to describe how the situation is represented mathematically.
So within the standard approach to the mathematics of quantum theory,
measurements play a role unlike the role they play in any previous science or in
any other current basic science. Recall our discussion in the previous section,
where we saw that within Newtonian physics, measurement plays no unusual role.

27 The Reality Question

That is, whether we choose to make a measurement of the position of the falling
baseball or not makes no difference to the system, nor does it make any difference
in the mathematical representation of the system.
But within the standard approach to quantum theory, making a measurement
changes the system (or more precisely, it changes the way the mathematics
represents the system). This unusual role of measurements raises difﬁcult
questions. Even if taken instrumentally, the role of measurement is unusual,
in that measurement changes the mathematical representation of the system
(again, contrast this with the Newtonian example above, where measurement
does not affect the way the system is represented).
But if we take the standard mathematics for quantum theory realistically, the
situation seems very odd. In particular, if we take the standard mathematics
realistically, measurements change the way the world is. If we choose to make a
measurement, the world will be one way. If we choose not to make a measurement,
the world will be another way. In short, in the standard approach to quantum theory
measurement plays a role unlike the role played in any previous science or in other
branches of current science. And as noted, this raises difﬁcult questions.
In a moment we will elaborate on some of these difﬁcult issues, but ﬁrst, it will
be helpful to explore a common and closely related topic found in most
discussions of quantum theory. From what has been said thus far, one might
be tempted to assume that the oddness involving quantum theory – for example
superpositions and the effect of measurements in ending superpositions –
primarily involves only the micro level of entities such as photons, electrons,
and the like, and not in the macro level world of you, me, and our houses and cars,
and so on. To indicate that the situation is not quite so simple, let’s consider
Schrödinger’s cat, which is a well-known creature that can be found lurking
around most discussions of quantum theory. Schrödinger’s cat is worth being
familiar with: it is a well-known example in the history of quantum theory, and it
also helps illustrate the oddness of superpositions of states, shows that such
oddness is not necessarily conﬁned to the micro level, serves as a good example to
ﬂesh out issues involved with the measurement problem, and will later in the
chapter help illustrate some key features of the interpretations of quantum theory
that we will consider shortly.
Schrödinger’s cat
In the late 1920s, Schrödinger himself became uncomfortable with some of the
unusual aspects of the mathematical approach that he had a central role in
developing. He presented a thought experiment which further illustrates some of
the oddness of the quantum picture. Incidentally, a “thought experiment” is just
what the name suggests, that is, an experiment we are asked to think through
rather than actually perform.
Schrödinger asks us to imagine a cat placed in a sealed box, along with a mild
source of radioactivity. The radioactive source is such that, over the course of one
hour, there is a 50% chance that it will emit a radioactive particle. If such a particle
is emitted, it will trigger a detector that in turn is rigged to break open a vial of
poison, which would be fatal to the cat.

253

254

Recent Developments

Schrödinger’s point, of course, was not to abuse cats – again, this is a thought
experiment, not one intended to actually be carried out (nor, if you think about it,
would doing the experiment yield any interesting data). Rather, his point was to
connect up the oddness of the micro-level to macro-level events, as well as to
illustrate the oddness of the superpositions of states that are so common in the
mathematics of quantum theory.
To understand the Schrödinger’s cat thought experiment, consider a slightly
altered setup similar to the beam splitter arrangement pictured in Figure 27.1.
Imagine placing the experimental setup described in Figure 27.1 into a large
opaque box. Along with the setup we will place a cat. We will also rig photon
detector A, but not detector B, to a vial of poison, just as in Schrödinger’s original
thought experiment. That is, if detector A registers a photon, it will open the vial
of poison, which again would be fatal to the cat. On the other hand, if photon
detector B registers a photon, then nothing happens. The setup would then look
as shown in Figure 27.2.
Suppose the entire apparatus, cat and all, is in the sealed box, so that we cannot
see or hear anything that goes on inside the box. We do, however, keep the button
that causes the photon gun to emit a photon outside the box.
Now, given this setup, suppose we push the button once. Recall that the
evolution of states over time is governed by Schrödinger’s equation, and that once
the photon has had time to reach the beam splitter, the equation represents the
situation as being in a superposition of states. Schrödinger’s equation would ﬁrst
represent the situation as a superposition of states, with one state representing a
wave moving toward detector A and the other representing a wave moving toward
detector B. A fraction of a second later, when the photon has had time to reach the

Figure 27.2 Schrödinger’s cat.

27 The Reality Question

detectors, the superposition would involve one state representing that detector A
has ﬁred, and the other state representing detector B as having ﬁred.
Recall that the detection of a photon at A will result in the poison being
released, and hence will result in a dead cat. A detection of a photon at B, on the
other hand, will leave the cat alive and well. So the superposition, as represented
by Schrödinger’s equation, would next move into a superposition of two states,
one in which the cat is dead and the other in which the cat is alive and well. In
other words, up until the time we choose to open the box and make an
observation, the standard approach to the mathematics of quantum theory is
representing the cat as existing in a superposition of cat-dead and cat-alive states.
Again, this is not in principle different from the superposition of the states of
the photon discussed in regard to Figure 27.1 above. As noted, however,
Schrödinger has moved the oddness from the micro to the macro level. The
example also vividly highlights the oddness of the notion of superpositions as used
in quantum theory, as well as providing a useful example to highlight aspects of
the measurement problem as well as aspects of various interpretations of
quantum theory. We turn next to discussions of these topics.
The Measurement Problem
If from the discussions above you have a sense of the unusual role measurement
plays in the standard approach to quantum theory, and a sense of the difﬁculties in
giving an account of what if anything distinguishes measurement devices from
nonmeasurement devices, then you already have a good general sense of the
measurement problem. My main goal here is to ﬂesh out this problem, and give an
idea of the different ways the measurement problem is often presented.
Subjectivity vs. objectivity

We saw above that measurement plays a central role in the standard mathemati­
cal approach to quantum theory, and a role unlike any that measurement plays in
any other basic science. As noted earlier, even if viewed purely instrumentally, the
role of measurement in the standard approach is a bit unusual. But from an
instrumentalist perspective, measurement is not a major problem, since there is
no question that the standard approach to quantum theory is extremely good at
making accurate predictions.
But if we try to interpret the standard approach realistically, we run into a
problem – or rather, we run into one way of looking at the problem. Recall from
the discussion above that whether something counts as a measurement – whether
something is or is not considered a measuring device – seems inherently
subjective, that is, it depends on our interests. But for the longest time we
have viewed our basic sciences – physics, chemistry, and the like – as sciences of
an objective world, of a world that is independent of us, a world that proceeds in
an objective manner independent of our interests. But with the standard approach
to quantum theory, it now seems we have a science (at least if viewed realistically)
in which our interests, our measurements, affect the way the world is. As I put it
earlier, if we choose to make a measurement the world will be one way, and if we
choose not to make a measurement the world will be a different way. And, again at

255

256

Recent Developments

least from a realist perspective, there seems to be something deeply troubling
about this.
The physicist John Bell (1928–90; we will look closely at one of Bell’s major
discoveries in the next chapter) put it as follows in a paper aptly titled “Against
‘Measurement’.” Incidentally, when Bell speaks of a “jump” he is referring to what,
above, we termed the collapse of the wave function (again, in the standard
approach, this occurs when a measurement takes place.)
What exactly qualiﬁes some physical systems to play the role of ‘measurer’?
Was the wavefunction of the world waiting to jump for thousands of
millions of years until a single-celled living creature appeared? Or did it
have to wait a little longer, for some better qualiﬁed system . . . with a PhD?
(Bell 1990, p. 34)
Bell is being somewhat sarcastic, of course, but his point should be clear. A
realistic interpretation of the standard approach seems to suggest that without
measurement, for example before the appearance of creatures capable of per­
forming measurements, the world would not have existed in any deﬁnite state.
And that a world with deﬁnite characteristics only came about once such
creatures arrived, and the world (or parts of it) is deﬁnite only when measure­
ments or observations are being made. Again, this runs strongly counter to widely
held views that our science is a science of an objective world, of an objective world
that exists and proceeds independently of the observations of creatures such as us.
Measurement contexts vs. nonmeasurement contexts

Another common way to present the measurement problem is in terms of
providing (or being unable to provide) a principled way of distinguishing
measurement contexts from nonmeasurement contexts. Recall that in a nonmeasurement context we apply Schrödinger’s equation, whereas in a measure­
ment context we cease applying Schrödinger’s equation and instead invoke the
collapse postulate. So the standard approach to quantum theory requires making
a distinction between measurement processes and nonmeasurement processes.
But recall our discussion from earlier in this chapter, where we emphasized that
there are no fundamental physical differences between objects we consider to be
measuring devices and those we do not consider to be measuring devices. In the
same way, there are no fundamental physical differences between contexts we
consider to be measurement contexts and those we do not. So the standard
approach to the mathematics of quantum theory relies on a distinction – that
between measurement contexts and nonmeasurement contexts – for which we
can provide no principled, objective justiﬁcation.
System vs. apparatus; macroscopic vs. microscopic levels

Another (though closely related) way to phrase the measurement problem is by
emphasizing that the standard approach presupposes a distinction between
system and apparatus. That is, it presupposes a distinction between the system
involving quantum entities, and the apparatus being used to perform a measure­
ment on that system. In the standard approach, the system is represented as

27 The Reality Question

evolving according to Schrödinger’s equation, whereas the measuring apparatus is
not represented as evolving according to this equation, but rather is viewed as
proceeding in a classical, Newtonian sort of way.
Or in slightly different terms, in a measurement involving a quantum system
the standard approach requires we distinguish between a micro-level system
consisting of quantum entities such as electrons, photons, and the like, and
macro-level measuring devices consisting of pointers, digital readouts, and the
like. Again, the former is represented as proceeding according to Schrödinger’s
equation; the latter is not.
But the same problem arises as we saw above, namely, there are no fundamental
physical differences between system and apparatus, or between micro and macro
levels. So there seems to be no objective, principled way of making the distinction
the standard approach requires.
Universality

A ﬁnal and closely related issue is worth mentioning brieﬂy, involving universal­
ity. Recall from earlier chapters that one of the shortcomings of Einstein’s special
theory of relativity was that it was not a universally applicable theory, but instead
could be applied only so long as certain special circumstances were met (the
situation had to involve only straight-line motion at uniform speed). And we saw
that Einstein spent the next 10 years overcoming this limitation, and eventually
developed a highly successful theory, the theory of general relativity, that applied
to all situations.
Likewise, one of the advantages of Newtonian physics over Aristotelian physics
was its universal applicability. Recall that within Aristotelian physics the account
of the movement of sublunar elements (the straight-line motion to an element’s
natural place) was different from the account of superlunar motion (the uniform,
circular motion of the element ether). The principles involved in Newtonian
physics, in contrast, were universally applicable principles. Universal gravitation is
called that precisely because it was viewed as applying universally, everywhere in
the universe. Likewise for the basic laws of motion. The universal applicability of
the basic principles of Newtonian physics was, and still is, viewed as one of the
major ways in which the Newtonian approach was so much better than the
Aristotelian approach.
This view that the principles of our fundamental theories should be universally
applicable has come to be seen as something we want from our basic theories. But I
think you can see the problem as it relates to the standard approach to quantum
theory. Schrödinger’s equation, which is at the heart of quantum theory, is not used
as a universal principle. Rather, it is applicable only within certain contexts. As we
saw above, we can describe these contexts in a variety of ways – as nonmeasurement
contexts, or as micro-level contexts, or as contexts involving systems as opposed to
devices used to measure those systems. But the bottom line is that in the standard
approach to quantum theory, Schrödinger’s equation, unlike the basic principles of
our fundamental sciences since Newton, does not universally apply. Or to put it in
slightly different terms, the standard approach gives up one of the most basic
aspects of our fundamental sciences – that the principles should apply universally –
that we have had since the advent of Newtonian science.

257

258

Recent Developments

Concluding thoughts on the measurement problem

The measurement problem is a deeply puzzling aspect of the standard approach
to quantum theory. As we saw above, there are a variety of ways to view the
measurement problem. But they all revolve around the same issue, namely, that in
the standard approach measurement plays a role unlike any that it has played in
any other basic science. And it plays a role that seems inappropriate for a basic
science. To again quote Bell:
Here are some words which, however legitimate and necessary in applica­
tion, have no place in a formulation with any pretension to physical
precision: system, apparatus, environment, microscopic, macroscopic,
reversible, irreversible, observable, information, measurement. (Bell 1990,
p. 34; emphasis his)
Note that Bell is not being critical of the standard approach when that approach
is taken instrumentally. Bell himself was a physicist whose daily work relied on
using the standard approach to quantum theory, and these words and concepts
are, he notes, necessary in applying quantum theory, for example, in solving
problems and making predictions about situations involving quantum entities.
And again, as a predictive science, the standard approach has been phenomenally
successful. Bell’s point, instead, is that if we want to take our basic sciences
realistically, such words and concepts should not be involved in the basic
formulation of any such science.
Recall that the measurement problem does not arise if one takes an instru­
mentalist attitude toward the standard approach to quantum theory. But if one
wishes to think about quantum theory through a realist lens, the measurement
problem is widely viewed as the major issue of concern. In fact, the major division
between categories of interpretations of quantum theory stems directly from what
general approach one is taking to address the measurement problem. In our ﬁnal
major section of this chapter, we turn to a discussion of the most common
interpretations of quantum theory.

Interpretations of Quantum Theory
Interpretations of quantum theory primarily involve views on what sort of reality
could underlie the known facts. In this chapter we will not be looking at every
interpretation that has been proposed, but we will look at the most common
proposals.
Our exploration, above, of the measurement problem provides a convenient
way to broadly categorize approaches to interpretations of quantum theory. In
particular, in what follows, interpretations will be divided into collapse interpre­
tations and non-collapse interpretations.
Collapse interpretations generally accept the standard approach to the mathe­
matics of quantum theory, including the collapse (or projection) postulate. Recall
that within the standard approach, the collapse of the wave function occurs when
a measurement takes place, and that at this point one ceases to apply

27 The Reality Question

Schrödinger’s equation and instead makes use of the collapse postulate. Thus
collapse interpretations must make a distinction between measurement contexts
and nonmeasurement contexts, and so all such interpretations inherit the difﬁcult
issues we saw above associated with the measurement problem.
In contrast, non-collapse interpretations reject the notion that a collapse of the
wave function plays any fundamental role, and likewise reject the use of the
collapse postulate. As we will see below, different non-collapse interpretations
accomplish this in different ways. All such interpretations thus have the substan­
tial virtue of avoiding the issues associated with the measurement problem. But
this virtue comes with a cost – as we will see below, such interpretations have
features that many view as substantially undesirable.
All of the viable interpretations of quantum theory – collapse interpretations as
well as non-collapse interpretations – have features that strike most people as
substantially odd. As I’ll note at the end of this chapter, which interpretation of
quantum theory one prefers generally boils down to what sort of oddness one
ﬁnds the least bothersome. With this in mind, we will turn now to an overview of
the most common collapse interpretations, and then look at some common noncollapse interpretations.
Collapse interpretations
The most common collapse interpretations are variations on what is commonly
termed the Copenhagen, or standard, interpretation. The phrases “the Copenha­
gen interpretation” and “the standard interpretation” are both somewhat mis­
leading, in that there is no one interpretation that ﬁts these titles. Rather,
adherents of this approach to interpretation tend to agree on one general issue,
but with nontrivial differences emerging based on their views of other issues. Let’s
begin with the general point advocates of this approach agree on.
Consider a simple setup involving a quantum entity. Suppose we have a single
electron contained in a small box divided into two sections labeled A and B, and
suppose that the standard mathematics tells us that, should we perform a
measurement on the location of the electron, there is a 50% chance of us
detecting the electron in section A and a 50% chance of us detecting it in B.
Suppose we ask advocates of the standard, or Copenhagen, interpretation what
is really going on in this case before we perform a measurement. Where is the
electron really located before the measurement? Or we might ask similar
questions about other attributes of the electron, for example, what its momentum
is before a measurement, or its spin, and so on.
Advocates of the standard interpretation generally take the view that there
are no answers to questions such as these. But importantly – and this is crucial
to understanding the sense of what is being said here – according to the
standard interpretation, the reason we cannot say what attributes a quantum
entity has before measurement is not simply because we do not know what
those attributes are. This is not a simple case of ignorance, of not knowing.
Rather, according to advocates of the Copenhagen interpretation, there is
nothing to be known. Those attributes do not exist prior to measurement.
According to this interpretation, there is no deep, independent reality

259

260

Recent Developments

consisting of objects with deﬁnite attributes existing prior to measurements of
those attributes.
This is a very counterintuitive view, so it is worth taking a moment to get clear
on it. Suppose I tell you I have a number of coins in my pocket. You presumably do
not know how many coins there are, but I am sure you are convinced that there is
a deﬁnite number. Maybe two, or three, or eight, but whatever the actual number,
you no doubt believe there is a deﬁnite, independent fact about how many coins
are in my pocket.
This is a case of everyday lack of knowledge. You cannot say how many coins
are in my pocket because you simply do not know how many there are.
Importantly, this is not the sort of lack of knowledge involved in the standard
interpretation. On the standard interpretation, there is nothing to know. The
electron has no deﬁnite position before measurement. It has no deﬁnite spin. And
so on.
Advocates of the standard interpretation are not denying the existence of
reality. That is, there is a reality, there are quantum entities, there is an electron
“out there.” But that electron, and quantum entities in general, do not possess
deﬁnite attributes before they are measured. Instead, according to this view, the
process of performing a measurement makes deﬁnite the particular attribute that
was measured.
To be completely accurate, I should note that everyone, including advocates of
the standard interpretation, agrees that quantum entities have a small number of
attributes independent of measurement. These attributes, such as mass, are
referred to as “static attributes.” But aside from these few static attributes,
according to the standard interpretation, the remaining attributes of a quantum
entity do not exist prior to a measurement.
In short, although there is a reality, it is not a reality that consists of quantum
entities with deﬁnite attributes before measurements. Take a moment to appre­
ciate how central a role measurement plays in this approach to interpreting
quantum theory. In a literal sense, on this interpretation an act of measurement
changes the way the world is. Before a measurement the world is one way, and
after a measurement it is another way. To again stress a point from above, on this
view what changes is not our knowledge of the world; rather, what changes is the
way the world is.
Within this general description of the standard interpretation, there are a
number of variations possible. We have noted that, according to the standard
interpretation, quantum entities do not have attributes until a measurement
occurs. But what is a quantum entity? We have thus far used as examples entities
such as electrons, photons, particles emitted during radioactive decay, and the
like. Everyone agrees that these are quantum entities.
But keep in mind that all objects are presumably composed of nothing more
than these basic entities. And as we discussed in the section above on the
measurement problem, there seems no principled, objective way of distinguishing
between micro-level entities such as electrons and photons and the like, and
macro-level entities such as you, me, rocks, chairs, and all other common objects.
So there is a good case to be made that “quantum entities” really should refer to
everything. At any rate, note that the answer to the question of what counts as a

27 The Reality Question

quantum entity is neither simple nor uncontroversial, and the question admits of
more than one answer.
Recall also from the section on the measurement problem that there seems to
be no objective, principled way of distinguishing a measurement process from a
nonmeasurement process. So the question “What counts as a measurement” is
likewise not a simple question. In short, the two questions of what counts as a
quantum entity, and what counts as a measurement, do not admit of single,
uncontroversial answers. And depending on how these questions are answered,
one arrives at various versions of the standard interpretation.
All of the variations agree that when a measurement occurs, the “collapse of the
wave function” results in an object acquiring a deﬁnite characteristic that prior to
measurement was not deﬁnite. In this way all the variations include the view that,
in some sense, reality is dependent on measurements, and so I will term these
variations “measurement-dependent realities” and distinguish them as mild,
moderate, or radical. We turn now to a discussion of these variations on the
standard, or Copenhagen, interpretation.
Mild measurement-dependent reality

According to this mild version, “quantum entity” refers only to the most basic
elementary particles such as electrons, neutrons, protons, and the wide variety of
other subatomic particles, photons, particles emitted during radioactive decay,
and the like. That is, the only quantum entities are the most basic “stuff” of the
universe, and it is only this elementary level that lacks deﬁnite attributes until
measurements are made.
Once again, let me repeat a point made above. Advocates of this variation, and
of the other variations as well, are not claiming that nothing exists before
measurement, and that measurements then bring a reality into existence out
of nothing. Rather, the idea is that there is a reality independent of measurement,
but as far as the most basic components of the universe go, it is a largely undeﬁned
reality. To return to the coins in pocket example, it would be similar to saying that
yes, there are coins in my pocket, but there is no deﬁnite number of coins, nor are
there deﬁnite shapes or sizes to the coins, That is, there is a reality consisting of
coins, but it is a reality lacking any deﬁnite attributes.
To apply this analogy to the quantum level, the advocates of this mild version of
measurement-dependent reality are saying that there is a reality consisting of
electrons, photons, and the like, but that reality is largely an undeﬁned reality. The
electrons are neither in this location nor that location, they have neither this spin
nor that spin, and so on, until a measurement of such attributes occurs. Only with
measurements do such entities acquire deﬁnite attributes.
With respect to the question of what counts as a measuring device, this version
answers the question in a broad way. For example, in the Schrödinger’s cat
scenario, the measuring devices are taken to include the photon detectors, the
cat’s auditory system, and our looking into the box and observing the detectors
and cat.
With respect to the Schrödinger’s cat example, note that on this interpretation,
the ﬁrst measurement occurs when the photon reaches the detector. The collapse
of the wave function occurs at this point, and it is at this point that the

261

262

Recent Developments

superposition of states ends. On this interpretation, the superposition ends before
it can move into the macro level, and thus the oddness of entities existing in
superpositions is conﬁned to the micro level.
In short, on the mild measurement-dependent reality interpretation, only the
elementary particles, such as electrons, photons, particles emitted during radio­
active decay, and so on, can exist in a superposition of states. And almost any sort
of measurement sufﬁces to collapse the wave function. To put it roughly, there is
still plenty of quantum weirdness, but on this view, the weirdness is conﬁned to
the micro level.
Moderate measurement-dependent reality

The mild version considered above took quantum entities to be only the
elementary particles. But presumably, everything is composed of such particles.
The coffee cup on the desk in front of you, for example, is at bottom composed of
just these elementary entities, so there is a good case to be made that, if the coffee
cup is composed of nothing but quantum entities, then the coffee cup itself should
likewise be considered a quantum entity, albeit a larger and more complex one
than the basic particles.
If we answer the question of what counts as a quantum entity in this broad
sense, that is, we count all objects as quantum entities, then we avoid at least part
of the problem of the mild measurement-dependent interpretation, that is, we
avoid being committed to there being a principled distinction between micro and
macro levels.
So, on this interpretation, almost any object can in principle exist in a
superposition of states. On this interpretation, then, some of the quantum
weirdness can bleed up to the macro level. However, the moderate measurement-dependent reality interpretation, as with the mild measurement-dependent
interpretation, takes a broad view of what counts as a measurement. So although
almost any object can in principle exist in a superposition of states, measurements
generally sufﬁce to collapse such superpositions before we or any other creatures
could experience them. To use the Schrödinger’s cat example as a concrete case,
on this interpretation, the photon detectors, cat, and so on count as quantum
entities, and so could in principle exist in a superposition of states. However, given
the broad approach to what counts as a measurement, the photon detector
sufﬁces to collapse the wave function well before any superposition of cat-alive
and cat-dead states could occur.
Radical measurement-dependent reality (consciousness-dependent reality)

Suppose, in keeping with the moderate variation above, we take a broad view of
what counts as a quantum entity, that is, everything counts. But suppose we take a
narrow view of what counts as a measurement. In particular, suppose we adopt
the view that the only genuine measurements are those that involve human
consciousness. So, for example, in the Schrödinger’s cat scenario, the ﬁrst
measurement does not take place until we open the box and look at the detectors
and cat.
This is a much more radical variation, for here, wave functions are not
collapsed until human observation is involved. So unobserved situations exist

27 The Reality Question

in superpositions of states – cats can exist in a superposition of dead and alive
states, and so on. In short, the world, when unobserved by humans, does not
consist of deﬁnite states. Unobserved objects are not deﬁnitely located at any
particular position, and so on.
What would motivate anyone to adopt this radical view of the world? The
answer is tied to what we focused on in the ﬁrst part of this chapter, that is, the
measurement problem. Consider again the Schrödinger’s cat scenario. As dis­
cussed earlier, the physical processes that occur in what we consider to be
measuring devices do not seem different in kind than other physical processes. So
it is difﬁcult to see how such a process could result in a collapse of the wave
function. If – and this is a big if – you view human consciousness as involving
processes that are different in kind than other processes, then in the chain of
events from the emission of a photon to our opening of the box and observing
what is inside, the observation by human consciousness is the only sort of event
that is different from the others. And so this, or at least so it has seemed to some
advocates of this interpretation, is the natural place to put the collapse of the wave
function.
Non-collapse interpretations
The measurement problem looms large for all versions of collapse interpreta­
tions, including all versions of the standard, or Copenhagen, interpretation
discussed above. Recall that advocates of the standard interpretation view the
collapse of the wave function as occurring upon measurement, and thus these
interpretations have to face all the issues surrounding the measurement problem,
including the perhaps unanswerable question of how to give a principled
distinction between measurement processes and nonmeasurement processes,
the subjectivity involved in measurements, the difﬁculty of distinguishing
between micro and macro levels, and so on.
The interpretations we consider next reject that a collapse of the wave function
plays any fundamental role, and thus I classify these as non-collapse interpreta­
tions. Going hand in hand with this, these interpretations reject the notion that
measurement plays any unusual role. So these interpretations have the virtue of
avoiding the measurement problem (and indeed, concerns about the measure­
ment problem largely provided the motivation for developing these alternative
views).
Different non-collapse interpretations avoid the measurement problem in
different ways. But as hinted at earlier, advocates of non-collapse interpretations
avoid the oddness of the measurement problem by introducing other sorts of
oddness into the picture. As we will see, the type of oddness varies from one
interpretation to the other. Let’s turn now to an overview of the main noncollapse interpretations that have been proposed.
Einstein’s realism

I should stress at the outset that Einstein’s interpretation – or at least, the key
elements of that interpretation that were most important to Einstein – is no
longer compatible with certain newly discovered quantum facts (we will see these

263

264

Recent Developments

in the next chapter). Thus his interpretation is no longer a viable option.
Nonetheless, Einstein’s view is worth discussing in part because of the historical
role it played in early debates over the interpretation of quantum theory. But it is
also worth noting because it tends to be the common-sense view, the view that I
think most people would prefer to adopt, and it is worth discussing so we can see
why this common-sense view is no longer viable.
Einstein’s interpretation is what is considered a hidden variable interpretation.
In general, hidden variable interpretations are those that maintain that the
mathematics described in the previous chapter are, at best, incomplete. In particu­
lar, the mathematics leaves out “elements of reality,” to use Einstein’s phrase. What
is needed, according to such interpretations, is to supplement the standard
mathematics for quantum theory with what have come to be called “hidden
variables,” that is, additional elements that ﬁll in the perceived incomplete aspects
of the existing mathematics. We will look at two main versions of hidden variable
interpretations, beginning with Einstein’s version.
Einstein was primarily responding to advocates of the standard, or Copen­
hagen, interpretation discussed above. Recall that on that interpretation,
quantum entities do not have deﬁnite attributes until they are measured to
have those attributes. Again, according to the standard interpretation, it is not
merely that we do not know what those attributes are; rather, quantum entities
do not have such attributes. Einstein’s view was that quantum entities must
have deﬁnite attributes before they are measured to have them. He was
convinced that reality had to be a deﬁnite reality, with objects, including
quantum entities, possessing deﬁnite attributes regardless of whether or not
we are measuring them. Thus, for Einstein, there could not be such a thing as a
superposition of states, and no such thing, from a realist perspective, as a
collapse of the wave function.
To return to the coin analogy: common sense tells us that there must be a
deﬁnite number of coins in my pocket, even if we do not know what that number
is. Likewise, common sense, so Einstein urged, tells us that quantum entities also
must have their attributes all along, not superpositions of attributes but deﬁnite
attributes, even before any measurements are performed.
However, the standard mathematics of quantum theory does not represent
quantum entities as having attributes before a measurement takes place. This is
the sense in which Einstein argued that the mathematics of quantum theory must
be incomplete. There are elements of reality – for example, quantum entities with
deﬁnite attributes before measurement – that quantum theory does not capture.
Hence, Einstein’s view was that a new theory was needed to take the place of
quantum theory – one that did all that quantum theory did but included the
“hidden variables,” not present in existing quantum theory, that reﬂected these
elements of reality. Einstein did not have speciﬁc proposals as to how quantum
theory ought to be supplemented, but he was convinced that quantum theory
needed to be supplemented.
We will discuss Einstein’s views further, and the new facts that are so
problematic for that view, in the next chapter. For now, we will simply repeat
that, in summary, Einstein’s is the common-sense interpretation, and that the key
elements of that interpretation are no longer compatible with the known facts. As

27 The Reality Question

such, Einstein’s interpretation, and, for that matter, any interpretation that ﬁts
with certain widely held views on how the universe works, is no longer viable.
Bohm’s realism

In the late 1940s and 1950s, David Bohm (1917–92) formulated a modiﬁcation of
the mathematics of quantum theory. Bohm’s mathematics, and the interpretation
of that mathematics, constitute the second of the hidden variable interpretations
we’ll consider. It is worth noting that a similar proposal had been suggested in the
late 1920s by the physicist Louis de Broglie (1892–1987), and thus this approach is
sometimes referred to at the de Broglie–Bohm approach. Let’s look brieﬂy at
some key aspects of this view.
First, it is worth noting that Bohm’s mathematics and the standard mathemat­
ics for quantum theory appear to make identical predictions. Thus there appears
to be no empirically testable difference between the two approaches. However,
unlike the standard approach to the mathematics of quantum theory, the basic
postulates at the core of Bohm’s mathematics do not include a collapse postulate,
that is, his mathematics involves no special postulate that is brought into play
during a measurement process. So on Bohm’s approach, measurement plays no
special role of the sort it plays in the standard mathematics of quantum theory.
Thus Bohm’s approach avoids all the issues we saw above in the discussion of the
measurement problem.
In general, the “picture” Bohm’s version paints of the underlying reality is quite
different from that suggested by the standard, or Copenhagen, interpretation of
quantum theory. Recall from our discussion above that, according to the standard
interpretation, quantum entities do not have deﬁnite characteristics, such as
position, before measurements. In contrast, Bohm treats quantum entities as
particles, each having a precise deﬁnite position at any given time, and under the
inﬂuence of what is commonly termed a “guidance wave” (sometimes referred to
as a “pilot wave”). So on Bohm’s view, quantum entities do have deﬁnite positions
independent of any measurements, and thus the knowledge we lack of, say, the
position of an electron is not a matter of the electron having no such position
before measurement; rather, our lack of knowledge is basically the same sort of
lack of knowledge we have as to how many coins are in my pocket.
With respect to the Schrödinger’s cat thought experiment, since the photon has
a deﬁnite position before measurement, there will be a fact of the matter
(although we will not know it until we open the box) as to whether detector
A or detector B registered the photon. Hence there will be, on Bohm’s interpre­
tation, no superposition of alive and dead cat. There is simply our lack of
knowledge as to which is the case.
A likely question at this point is this: If Bohm’s view has all the predictive power
of the usual approach to quantum theory, and if, on Bohm’s view, we can view the
underlying reality as being the sort of well-deﬁned reality most of us are more
comfortable with, why isn’t Bohm’s view the standard view? That is, why is his
approach, his interpretation, a minority view? Why hasn’t his view taken over as
the majority view?
Issues surrounding Bohm’s interpretation are complex and contentious, and
there are no easy answers to these questions. However, I will suggest two general

265

266

Recent Developments

(and partial) answers to such questions. First, note that Bohm’s mathematics
cannot be shown to be better than the existing mathematics. Again, Bohm’s
mathematics and the standard mathematics of quantum theory appear to make
identical predictions. And recall that the standard mathematics for quantum
theory had been in place for quite a few years before Bohm proposed his
modiﬁcations. Physicists had become comfortable with the existing mathematics.
But now Bohm suggests an alternative mathematics. But since his mathematics
makes no new predictions, it cannot be shown to be any better than the
mathematics already in place. Thus, from a practical point of view, there is no
compelling reason to replace the existing mathematics with Bohm’s new
approach. And since his interpretation of quantum theory is tied to his mathe­
matics for quantum theory, I suspect the lack of enthusiasm for his mathematics
resulted in a lack of enthusiasm for his interpretation.
Second, although Bohm’s mathematics can arrive at the same predictions as the
standard mathematics, it is not clear that Bohm’s mathematics lend themselves to
an interpretation that is any less problematic than the standard interpretation. In
a nutshell, here is the perceived problem: the key features of Bohm’s approach –
most notably the guidance wave and the view of quantum entities as particles
having deﬁnite positions at any given time – must be taken realistically. It is worth
stressing this: if these features are not taken as representing something real, then
there is no reason at all to prefer Bohm’s approach. That is, if one is going to take
an instrumentalist attitude toward quantum theory, then one might as well stick
with the standard mathematics that most physicists use.
But if viewed realistically, it is not clear that Bohm’s theory can be made to ﬁt
comfortably with Einstein’s relativity. First, Bohm’s guidance wave requires faster­
than-light inﬂuences (superluminal inﬂuences is the standard way to describe such
faster-than-light inﬂuences), and there is a common perception that the superluminal inﬂuences in Bohm’s approach conﬂict with Einstein’s theory of relativity.
In addition, Bohm’s approach seems to require a robust notion of simultaneity
that may be incompatible with Einstein’s relativity. Recall that Bohm requires all
particles to have deﬁnite positions at any given time. But in previous chapters we
saw that on Einstein’s relativity, there is no uniquely correct answer as to where
objects are located and at what time – it depends on one’s frame of reference. So
this aspect of Bohm’s approach seems to conﬂict with the relativity of simultaneity
discussed in Chapter 23.
In short, there is a widespread perception that Bohm’s approach conﬂicts with
relativity, and if forced to choose between Bohm’s interpretation and Einstein’s
relativity, there is not much question that relativity would win out. It is worth
noting, however, that whether this tension with relativity is any more problematic
for Bohm’s approach than for other interpretations is another, and difﬁcult,
question. Advocates of Bohm’s approach point out, correctly, that no version or
interpretation of quantum theory ﬁts well with Einstein’s relativity. For example,
as we will see in the next chapter, recently discovered quantum facts rule out any
interpretation that does not allow for some sort of superluminal inﬂuences. In
light of these newly discovered facts, advocates of Bohm’s interpretation argue
that the superluminal inﬂuences required by Bohm’s interpretation are no more
problematic than those required by any viable interpretation.

27 The Reality Question

The issues involved in this debate are complex, and it is an open question as to
whether the tension between Bohm’s interpretation and relativity theory is
genuinely problematic. Or more precisely, it is an open question as to whether
this tension is more problematic for Bohm’s approach than for other approaches.
It is safe to say, though, that Bohm’s interpretation is often perceived as having
more difﬁculty ﬁtting in with Einstein’s relativity, and this is one of the main
reasons why Bohm’s interpretation is not more widely accepted.
The many-worlds interpretation

Einstein’s realism and Bohm’s realism are the two main types of non-collapse
interpretations that fall under the heading of hidden variable theories. There is
another popular interpretation, the many-worlds interpretation, that is a noncollapse interpretation but not a hidden variable interpretation. As with Bohm’s
and Einstein’s interpretations, the many-worlds interpretation rejects the notion
of a collapse of the wave function, but does so in a way different from that
suggested by Einstein or Bohm. It will be easiest to understand this interpretation
if we consider a particular experimental setup.
Consider again the beam splitter arrangement depicted in Figure 27.1. Suppose
we push the button once. Recall that, after the photon passes through the beam
splitter but before it reaches the detectors, the standard mathematics of quantum
theory represents the photon as existing in a superposition of states. Again, one
state represents the photon as a wave going toward detector A, and the other state
represents the photon as a wave going toward detector B.
Now suppose, a fraction of a second later when the photon has had time to
reach the detectors, that we hear detector A beep, indicating that it has detected a
photon. According to all the collapse interpretations, no later than at the time we
hear the detector beep, there has been a collapse of the wave function. That is, on
all collapse interpretations, by the time we hear a detector beep the superposition
of states has collapsed to a single state, in this case, a state involving a photon at
detector A.
What does the many-worlds interpretation say about this scenario? According
to the many-worlds interpretation, the wave function never collapses. Rather, the
situation continues to evolve over time in accordance with Schrödinger’s equa­
tion, which if taken realistically, as the many-worlds interpretation does, suggests
a situation involving an increasingly complex superposition of states.
A similar story holds for the Schrödinger’s cat scenario. Neither the photon
detectors, nor the cat’s auditory system, nor you and I looking in the box collapses
the wave function. Again, on this interpretation there is no such thing as a collapse
of the wave function.
An obvious question is this: If the wave function does not collapse, and there is
the superposition of states just described, then why do you and I not observe such
superpositions of states? Why, in the example depicted in Figure 27.1, do we
observe only detector A registering a photon? And in the Schrödinger’s cat
scenario, why do we not observe the superposition of cat-alive and cat-dead
states?
The answer is that you and I are part of one of the states making up the
superposition of states. You and I inhabit, so to speak, one of the states involved in

267

268

Recent Developments

the superposition. You and I happen to inhabit (or perhaps it would be better to
say we are part of) the state in which detector A registered the photon, or in the
Schrödinger’s cat scenario, the state in which the cat is dead. But since there has
not been (and never is) a collapse of the wave function, the other states also exist.
You and I, the detectors, the cat, and so on have counterparts that inhabit the
other states. (Incidentally, no word is quite right, but “counterparts” probably
comes closest.) Whereas we heard detector A beep, our counterparts heard
detector B beep. And whereas we are looking at a deceased cat, our counterparts
are gazing at a cat that is perfectly happy and alive.
In short, there is no artiﬁcial and mysterious collapse of the wave function. The
wave function representing the entire universe – that is, the wave function
representing everything, including you and me and all our counterparts – evolves
according to the Schrödinger equation. This wave function represents a universe
consisting of superpositions of an enormous number of states, and the number of
these states is constantly increasing. Exactly one of those unimaginably huge
number of states is the state that you and I inhabit. But from a broad viewpoint,
there is nothing special about this state – it is no more or less “real” than all the
other states involved in the overall superposition.
The overall picture that goes along with the many-worlds interpretation is of a
constantly branching tree, with each branch representing a state involved in the
huge superposition of states. A new branch sprouts each time a quantum entity
enters a situation leading to a superposition of states. Since this occurs very, very
often, new branches of this tree are sprouting at a furious pace.
Observations on the interpretations of quantum theory
As we have emphasized, interpretations of quantum theory must be constrained
by the known quantum facts and, presumably, they will be compatible with either
the standard mathematics of quantum theory or perhaps (for example, as in
Bohm’s interpretation) with an alternative approach to the mathematics. But as
we have seen, the facts themselves are quite strange, and the standard mathe­
matics does not lend itself to a common-sense “picture” of reality. And largely for
these reasons, the interpretations of quantum theory all tend to be quite contrary
to common sense. The sole exception to this is Einstein’s interpretation, which as
we have noted, is no longer a viable option.
We should note that, with respect to the interpretation question, an instru­
mentalist attitude is a common approach. That is, one taking a purely instru­
mentalist attitude toward quantum theory will not dabble in the interpretation
issue. With this attitude, quantum theory is viewed as a convenient tool for
making predictions, much as Ptolemaic epicycles were viewed as a convenient
mathematical tool for making predictions. But when asked about the reality
underlying the theory, an instrumentalist will take an agnostic attitude. And
again, this is a perfectly respectable approach to take toward quantum theory.
Indeed, there is much to be said for the view that this is the most practical attitude
for working physicists to take, at least during working hours.
But for those of us who are not working physicists, and even for physicists after
the lab has closed for the day, it is difﬁcult to resist the question that has occupied

27 The Reality Question

so much of western thought since the time of the ancient Greeks: What kind of
universe do we live in? Our answers to this question have always been heavily
inﬂuenced by our best science, and quantum theory is certainly one of the most
important and successful theories in our history. Thus it is appropriate that
quantum theory inﬂuence our current views on the sort of universe we inhabit.
But notably, the available interpretations of quantum theory paint a picture of a
universe very much unlike what we have always thought it was like.
The versions of the standard interpretation, Bohm’s interpretation, and the
many-worlds interpretation all have aspects that are attractive and aspects that
are not so attractive. It is worth taking a minute to summarize the virtues and
vices of each of the interpretations.
As we saw, the standard interpretation has the virtue of being a reasonably
“minimalist” interpretation, that is, an interpretation that sticks reasonably close
to, and takes at pretty much face value, the standard mathematics described in the
previous chapter. If, for example, the mathematics suggests that an electron in a
particular situation has no deﬁnite position, then so be it. We will just have to
accept that the world does not consist of deﬁnite entities that always have
determinate properties.
But, as we also saw, advocates of the standard interpretation accept the notion
of a collapse of the wave function. The collapse presumably occurs when a
measurement takes place, and this leaves the advocates of the standard interpre­
tation with no good answers to difﬁcult questions surrounding the measurement
problem. What in the world is happening during a measurement? Since a
measurement process is just a physical process, not different in kind than
processes we do not consider to be measurement processes, how could there
be any real difference between a measurement process and a nonmeasurement
process? Likewise, if everything is composed of quantum entities, how could there
be any real difference between measuring devices and the quantum systems they
are measuring? How can there be any real difference between the micro-level
world and the macro-level world? These questions are all variations of the
measurement problem, or perhaps better, they are different angles from which
to view the measurement problem. The collapse of the wave function raises
difﬁcult questions for advocates of the standard interpretation, and advocates of
this approach lack good answers to such questions.
In contrast, Bohm’s interpretation has the noteworthy virtue of avoiding the
measurement problem. On his interpretation, there is no collapse of the wave
function, and hence advocates of his interpretation do not have the difﬁcult
questions mentioned above. On Bohm’s interpretation, there is no fundamental
difference between measuring devices and the quantum systems they measure, no
mysterious collapse of the wave function, and no measurement problem.
But Bohm’s interpretation is widely seen as not ﬁtting comfortably with
Einstein’s theory of relativity, and in particular, as having more of a tension
with relativity than other interpretations have. Since Einstein’s relativity is a key
branch of modern physics, this is a potentially serious vice. So Bohm’s interpre­
tation, in spite of its virtues, carries with it some substantial baggage.
The many-worlds interpretation likewise has the substantial virtue of avoiding
the measurement problem. Here, too, there is no collapse of the wave function,

269

270

Recent Developments

and hence none of the difﬁcult questions that accompany the collapse. Moreover,
this interpretation is a truly minimalist interpretation. That is, it accepts at face
value the picture suggested by the mathematics (though not including the
projection/collapse postulate) discussed in the previous chapter. If the mathe­
matics of quantum theory suggests that systems involving quantum entities exist
in superpositions of states, then so be it. You, me, all the objects around us, and so
on are merely part of one state among the enormously complex superposition of
states involving everything there is. This is what the mathematics suggests, and
the advocates of the many-worlds interpretation accept it at face value.
But the virtues of the many-worlds interpretation come only with the vice that
this interpretation is perhaps the most counterintuitive of all. It is difﬁcult to
envision reality being as different as that painted by the many-worlds interpreta­
tion, consisting of unimaginably large numbers of counterparts of you and me and
most of what we see around us. And it can be equally difﬁcult to envision a reality
that does not consist of the single, deﬁnite world we seem to see around us, but
rather consists of a superposition of a huge number of states, of which that we see
around us is but one. So in short, the many-worlds interpretation, as with the
others, has both its virtues and its vices.
Perhaps, at this point, we can better understand why an instrumentalist attitude
toward quantum theory is so common. Review for a moment some of the theories
we considered earlier in the book. For most of western history since Aristotle, the
Ptolemaic theory was our best theory in terms of accounting for the astronomical
data. But as we saw, the theory requires epicycles. And it is difﬁcult to imagine
how planets could really move on small circles like that, that is, it is difﬁcult to take
epicycles with a realist attitude. And so, given such difﬁculties with viewing
planets as really moving the way they were described on the Ptolemaic system, it
was common for astronomers to take an instrumentalist attitude toward Ptole­
maic epicycles.
With the acceptance of Kepler’s view of planetary motion, with planets moving
in elliptical orbits at varying speeds, we had a picture of planetary motion that
easily could be (and was, and is) taken realistically. But this view of planetary
motion only tells us that planets move this way, with no fuller understanding of
why they move as they do. Newton’s physics seemed to provide an explanation for
planetary motion: elliptical orbits are what one would expect from the principle of
inertia and the principle of universal gravitation.
But as we saw at the end of Chapter 20, if taken realistically, Newton’s concept
of gravity seemed to involve mysterious action at a distance. And again it was
difﬁcult to imagine how there could really be such mysterious, “occult” forces.
And also as we saw toward the end of Chapter 20, largely for these reasons
Newton himself professed to take an instrumentalist attitude toward gravity.
And as we are seeing, quantum theory likewise does not lend itself to a
commonsensical picture of reality. And so the fact that an instrumentalist attitude
toward quantum theory is common may be simply the latest version of a trend that
has been around for some time, that of taking an instrumentalist attitude toward
theories that do not lend themselves to unproblematic realistic interpretations.
But if we do want to consider the reality question – we are interested in the
question of what sort of world we live in – it is worth noting that all the available

27 The Reality Question

interpretations have aspects that are not so appealing. And as mentioned at the
outset of this section, not only is there is no consensus as to which interpretation,
if any, is correct, there is not even a consensus on which interpretation is
preferable. Which interpretation one favors tends to boil down to the largely
aesthetic question of what ﬂavor of oddness one prefers. Or, perhaps better, what
ﬂavor of oddness one ﬁnds least bothersome.

Concluding Remarks
As we saw in the previous chapter, the quantum facts are surprising, but there is
no controversy over what those facts are. And the mathematics of quantum
theory is, as noted, a variation on a wave sort of mathematics that is not at all
unusual in physics.
The most unusual and controversial and difﬁcult issues arise with reality
questions, most notably the measurement problem and issues involving inter­
pretation questions. As we saw, none of the usual interpretations (other than
Einstein’s, which as noted is no longer a viable option) paint a picture of reality
that is anything like the usual picture we have had for at least the past 2,500 years.
In the next chapter, we will explore some recent empirical results that have
additional implications for the reality question. In particular, the results clarify
what sorts of interpretations are viable options. As we will see, the new results do
not make the situation any less odd, but they do help identify where the oddness
lies.

271

272

28
Quantum Theory and Locality: EPR, Bell’s Theorem, and
the Aspect Experiments
In the previous two chapters we explored some quantum facts, saw an overview of
the mathematics of quantum theory, and explored the measurement problem and
interpretations of quantum theory. In recent years, certain new quantum facts
have arisen, and these facts have substantial implications for the interpretation
question. Our main goals in this chapter are (a) to understand these recent
experiments involving quantum theory that are often claimed to have substantial
implications for our view of reality, and (b) to analyze these alleged implications.
In particular, we will look carefully at the claim that these recent experiments
show that any “local” view of reality must be mistaken. As with previous chapters,
let us begin with some introductory material.

Background Information
As emphasized in the previous chapters, it is important to keep distinct the
quantum facts, quantum theory itself, and the interpretation of quantum theory.
In this chapter we are primarily interested in recent experiments that are often
claimed to have substantial implications for interpretations of quantum theory.
These experiments fall under the heading of quantum facts. In other words, the
experiments in question, and the outcomes of those experiments, are nothing
more or less than new quantum facts. On the other hand, the alleged implications
of the experiments are part of the reality question involved in the interpretation of
quantum theory. Again, quantum facts are important to the interpretation
question because such facts constrain the types of answers we can give to that
question. In particular, whatever reality is like, it had better be the sort of reality
that can produce the known facts.
Allegedly, certain recent quantum facts rule out any “local” view of reality. That
is, recent quantum facts supposedly are such that only a nonlocal reality could
produce them. We will at some point have to consider carefully what is meant by
“locality” and “local” views of reality, but ﬁrst I want to try to describe these new
quantum facts in a way that is as accessible as possible.
These new facts are most easily understood by looking at what I will call the
EPR/Bell/Aspect trilogy. This trilogy consists of the EPR thought experiment,
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

28 EPR, Bell’s Theorem, and the Aspect Experiments

presented in a 1935 paper by Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen; John Bell’s 1964
proof, generally referred to as Bell’s theorem or Bell’s inequality; and a series of
experiments from Alain Aspect’s lab, beginning in the mid-1970s and culminat­
ing in a series of important experiments in the early 1980s.
In what follows, I will be presenting slightly simpliﬁed versions of the EPR, Bell,
and Aspect material. For example, I will present EPR, Bell, and Aspect as if all
three were concerned with simple polarization attributes of photons, whereas in
fact the story is a little more complicated. Also, I will present Bell’s theorem as if it
were the design for an experiment, whereas it actually is a mathematical proof
rather than an experimental design. We will also somewhat simplify issues
involved with the polarization of photons, and somewhat simplify the description
of the relevant experiments. These minor simpliﬁcations will make this material
substantially easier to follow, while in no way distorting the key ideas behind EPR,
Bell’s theorem, and the Aspect experiments. Let’s begin with the EPR thought
experiment.

The EPR Thought Experiment
The discussion to follow focuses largely on the “polarization” of photons. The
discussion requires no knowledge of what polarization is. This is good, because no
one knows what polarization “really” is anyway. For this discussion, all you need to
know is that polarization is an attribute of photons (in something very roughly like
the way orangeness is an attribute of pumpkins), and that polarization can be
detected by polarization detectors.
Suppose our polarization detectors will register any photon as having “Up”
polarization or “Down” polarization, and that for an individual photon, there is a
50:50 chance of being measured as having Up polarization and a 50:50 chance of
being measured as having Down polarization.
Suppose we generate a special pair of photons, in particular, a pair of photons in
the twin state. By saying the photons are in the twin state, I mean simply that
should we measure the polarization of the two photons, they will always be
measured to have the same polarization. In particular, either both photons will be
measured as having Up polarization or both will be measured as having Down
polarization. (More precisely, if we use polarization detectors that are conﬁgured
in the same way then both detectors will read Up or both will read Down. For the
remainder of this section we will assume we are using identically conﬁgured
detectors for both measurements.)
Notably, aside from the results of such a measurement, nothing more or less is
meant by saying the photons are in the twin state. In particular, nothing is being
said or implied about what the photons are “really” like when they are not being
measured. In short, I am simply describing some quantum facts: if you generate a
pair of such photons and perform a polarization measurement on them, the
polarization detectors will both read Up or both read Down. Again, that is all that
is meant by saying the photons are in the twin state. Try to stick with just these
facts, and resist the temptation to imagine a picture of what is “really” going on
with the photons when they are not being measured.

273

274

Recent Developments

Figure 28.1 A typical EPR setup.

Now suppose we take these photons that are in the twin state, separate them,
and send them off in opposite directions toward two polarization detectors. Call
the detectors A and B, and let’s suppose that B is slightly farther away from the
photon source than is A. The setup looks as in Figure 28.1.
Let us focus on the photon speeding toward A. Suppose that as the photon
reaches A, the detector registers it as having Up polarization. At this point we
know that, a fraction of a second later, when the other photon reaches detector B,
it too will be registered as having Up polarization (we know this because the
photons are in the twin state, and so will always be measured as having the same
polarization). And indeed, a fraction of a second later, the photon at B is indeed
registered as having Up polarization.
That is all there is to the EPR scenario. Given what I have said so far, nothing
should seem remotely surprising or curious about this scenario. So, what’s the big
deal? What were Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen up to in devising this scenario?
In the setup described above, Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen were trying to
convince us that quantum theory is incomplete, that is, that there were “elements
of reality” (to use a phrase found in the EPR paper) that were not included in
quantum theory. Speciﬁcally, Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen are arguing that
1) the photons must have a deﬁnite polarization before they are measured as
having that polarization,
but
2) quantum theory does not represent either photon as having any deﬁnite
polarization before it is measured as having that polarization.
So, the EPR argument goes, quantum theory is an incomplete theory of reality,
in that quantum theory fails to represent an element of reality, namely, the
polarization of the photons before they are detected.
Claim (2) is correct, that is, this is indeed a feature of quantum theory. Before
measurement, the standard mathematics of quantum theory will not represent
each photon as having any deﬁnite polarization, but rather will represent the
photons as being in a superposition of Up and Down polarization.
Since (2) is correct, if EPR can convince us that (1) is also correct, they have a
powerful argument for their conclusion that quantum theory is an incomplete

28 EPR, Bell’s Theorem, and the Aspect Experiments

theory. Our next task, then, is to look carefully at the reasons for believing claim
(1). This can get complicated, but go slowly and what I say should become clear.
The argument for (1)
To understand the argument for (1), we need to understand what has come to be
called the locality assumption. As with a lot of basic assumptions, it is remarkably
difﬁcult to put into words. Before attempting a deﬁnition, let me ﬁrst illustrate the
locality assumption with some examples.
Let’s return to an example from earlier in the book. Suppose I put some object,
say a ballpoint pen, on a table in front of you. I ask you to move the pen, but
without touching it, blowing on it, shaking the table, paying someone $5 to move
the pen for you, using any “psychic powers of the mind” you might have, and in
general, without in any way having any contact whatsoever (physical or otherwise)
with the pen. Chances are you think I am asking you to do something impossible.
But why do you think it is impossible? Presumably because you think that one
thing (in this case you) cannot inﬂuence or have any effect on another thing (in
this case the pen), unless there is some sort of contact (for example, physical
contact, or communication, or at least some sort of connection) between the two
things.
Another example: suppose we send Sara and Joe to get donuts every morning.
We send Sara to the Donut King on the north side of town, and we send Joe to the
Donut King located some distance in the opposite direction, on the south side of
town. They leave at the same time, and we might even send someone with them,
to make sure they go to their assigned donut store. Suppose every day that Sara
chooses cream-ﬁlled donuts, Joe also chooses cream-ﬁlled donuts, and every day
that Sara chooses chocolate-covered donuts, Joe also chooses chocolate-covered
donuts. And in general, whatever type of donut Sara chooses, Joe chooses the
same. This goes on day after day, week after week, month after month. In this
scenario, our intuitions are that there must be some sort of connection, some sort
of communication, between Sara and Joe. We tend to feel that what happens at
one location – in this case, Sara’s choice of donuts at her donut store – cannot
inﬂuence what happens at another location – Joe’s choice of donuts at his donut
store – unless there is some sort of connection or communication between them.
This latter phrase is one way of phrasing the locality assumption. In short:
The Locality Assumption (rough version): What happens at one location
cannot inﬂuence what happens at another location unless there is some sort
of connection or communication between the two locations.
What exactly is meant by “some sort of connection or communication,” and
what it means for one thing to “inﬂuence” another, can be understood in a variety
of ways, and this fact has led to a great deal of misunderstanding and mis­
communication concerning the locality assumption. Later in this section we will
explore the various ways of understanding these notions, and thus various more
precise ways of understanding the locality assumption. For the sake of the EPR
argument, this somewhat rough version of the locality assumption will sufﬁce.

275

276

Recent Developments

With the locality assumption on the table, EPR’s argument for (1) can be
ﬁnished quickly. From the locality assumption it follows that the measurement of
the polarization of the photon at detector A cannot inﬂuence the measurement of
the polarization of the photon at detector B. The reason for this is simply that the
two detectors are too far apart, and hence there simply is not time for any sort of
signal or communication or inﬂuence to travel from A to B. At least, there can be
no such inﬂuence unless the inﬂuence travels faster than light, and since it is
widely accepted (based on Einstein’s relativity theory) that no such inﬂuence can
travel faster than light, there seem to be excellent reasons for thinking that what
happens at detector A cannot inﬂuence what happens at detector B. Thus the
perfect correlation between the polarization of the photon at A and the polariza­
tion of the photon at B can only be explained if the photons had a deﬁnite
polarization before they were detected. In other words, if the locality assumption
is correct, then (1) follows.
One can summarize the EPR argument in this way: either the locality assump­
tion is false or quantum theory is an incomplete theory. But (EPR continues) no
one in their right mind would give up the locality assumption. So (EPR concludes)
quantum theory must be an incomplete theory.

Bell’s Theorem
Note that there would be no point in actually carrying out the EPR thought
experiment. This is because the central issue is whether the photons have their
polarization before they are detected, and carrying out the experiment can only
tell us about their polarization when they are detected, not before.
In 1964, John Bell (1928–90) began to consider the question of whether there
was any way to modify the EPR scenario in such a way that actually carrying out
the modiﬁed experiment could tell us something interesting. And, in fact, he did
ﬁnd a way to modify the experiment in an interesting way. Bell’s result is generally
referred to as Bell’s theorem or Bell’s inequality. As the name suggests, Bell’s result
is essentially a mathematical proof. However, it is easier to understand if we think
of it as a design for an experiment, and so that is the way I will describe it below.
Bell himself, along with David Mermin and Nick Herbert, has produced some
very good nonmathematical expositions of Bell’s theorem. In what follows,
although the Coke machine analogy is mine, some key ideas are taken from
what I think are the best aspects of their explanations. Bear with me here – this
will take a few minutes, but when we are ﬁnished you will have done an informal
deduction of Bell’s theorem.
Let’s begin with a Coke machine analogy. Consider the picture in Figure 28.2. In
this setup, we have two more or less identical Coke machines, which we will call
machine A and machine B. We also have a button, and each time we press the
button, each machine produces a can of soda. Let’s suppose, in fact, that each time
we press the button, each machine produces either a diet cola, which I will
abbreviate with a D, or else a 7 Up, the Uncola (as they used to call it), which I will
abbreviate with a U. Each machine also has a dial with three settings, labeled L
(left), M (middle), and R (right).

28 EPR, Bell’s Theorem, and the Aspect Experiments

Figure 28.2 Coke machine analogy.

Finally, suppose there is no apparent communication or connection between
the two Coke machines. That is, we can ﬁnd no wires, no radio links, nor any other
sort of connection between A and B. With this in mind, we will describe four
scenarios.
For scenario 1, the dial on machine A is set to its middle position, and likewise
the dial on B is set to its middle position. Suppose we push the button hundreds of
times, and observe that every time we push the button, the machines produce
identical soft drinks. That is, every time A produces a diet cola, B likewise
produces a diet cola, and every time A produces a 7 Up (an Uncola), B likewise
produces a 7 Up. Moreover, we notice that the machines produce a random
mixture of diet colas and 7 Ups. That is, although they always produce identical
sodas, 50% of the time it is a diet cola, and 50% of the time it is a 7 Up.
Suppose we use A:M to abbreviate that the dial on machine A is set to the
middle position, and likewise use B:M to abbreviate that the dial on machine B is
set to its middle position. Suppose we use D and U to represent the two types of
sodas, and record the output of each machine (for example, A:M DUDDU­
DUUUD represents the output of 10 button presses for machine A when set to its
middle position). Then we can summarize scenario 1 as follows:
Scenario 1
A:M DUDDUDUUUDUDDUUDUDDUDUUUDUDD . . .
B:M DUDDUDUUUDUDDUUDUDDUDUUUDUDD . . .
Summary: identical outputs
For scenario 2, we will move the dial on A to its left position, and leave the dial
on B in its middle position. Suppose that when we set the dials in this way, and
press the button a number of times, we notice that although the machines usually
produce identical sodas, occasionally they do not match. In particular, we notice
that there is a 25% difference in the outputs of the two machines when the dials
are set in this way. To summarize:
Scenario 2
A:L DDUDUUDUDDUUDUDUUDUDDDUDUUDU . . .
B:M DUUDUDDUDDUUDUUDUDUDUDUDDUUU . . .
Summary: 25% difference
For scenario 3, we will return the dial on A to its middle position, and move the
dial on B to its right position. We again push the button a number of times, and

277

278

Recent Developments

again notice that, although the outputs usually match, 25% of the time they do not.
In summary:
Scenario 3
A:M UUDUDDUDUUDDDUDUUUDUDUUDDUDD . . .
B:R UDDUDUUDDUDUDUDDUUUUDUDDDUDD . . .
Summary: 25% difference
For scenario 4, we will put the dial on machine A in its left position (as in
scenario 2), and put the dial on machine B in its right position (as in scenario 3).
Leaving out the results, here is the setup for scenario 4:
Scenario 4
A:L ???
B:R ???
Summary: ???
Now let’s consider what we would expect as an outcome when the dials on A
and B are set this way, assuming the following are true:
a) There is no communication or connection between the two machines.
b) The locality assumption is correct.
If (a) and (b) are correct, then the 25% difference in scenario 2 has to be a result
only of changes to machine A resulting from moving its dial. And likewise, the 25%
difference in scenario 3 must be the result only of changes made to B resulting from
moving B’s dial. That is, if there is no communication or connection between the
two machines, then moving A’s dial can only affect the output of machine A, and
moving B’s dial can only affect the output of machine B.
So if moving the dial on A produces a 25% difference in A’s output, and moving
the dial on B produces a 25% difference in B’s output, then ask this key question:
When we move both dials, as in scenario 4, what is the maximum difference there
can be between the outputs?
Before moving on, pause for a moment to understand and answer this question.
If you see the answer, then you have done what is essentially an informal
deduction of Bell’s theorem. The correct answer is that, given (a) and (b), the
maximum difference in scenario 4 is 50%. That is, if moving the dial on A
produces a 25% difference in A’s output but does not affect B’s output, and
moving the dial on B produces a 25% difference in B’s output but does not affect
A’s output, then changing both dials can result in a combined difference of at
most 50%. And this deduction, that in scenarios such as this there can be a
maximum difference of 50%, is essentially Bell’s theorem.
Of course, Bell was not concerned with the output of Coke machines, and
indeed, the Coke machine situation is merely an analogy. To see how this relates
to quantum theory, let’s tie the Coke machine analogy up with quantum theory.
Suppose that, when we press the button, instead of producing cans of sodas in
Coke machines, each time we press the button we produce a pair of photons in the
twin state, exactly as described in the EPR scenario pictured in Figure 28.1. And
instead of Coke machines, we have photon detectors A and B, again just like in
Figure 28.1. But unlike the basic EPR scenario of Figure 28.1, these detectors come

28 EPR, Bell’s Theorem, and the Aspect Experiments

Figure 28.3 Modiﬁed EPR scenario.

equipped with dials like those on the Coke machines, with L, M, and R settings.
This modiﬁed EPR scenario would appear as in Figure 28.3.
Photon detectors can in fact have settings equivalent to the L, M, and R settings
depicted in Figure 28.3. Now suppose we perform some experiments exactly analo­
gous to the Coke machine scenarios. Suppose we set both photon detectors to their
middle position, and push the button repeatedly, each time generating a pair of
photons in the twin state which are then sent out to their respective detectors. Recall
that for photons in the twin state, so long as the detectors are identical, the photons will
be detected either as both having Up polarization or both having Down polarization. In
particular, the photons will both be detected as having the same polarization so long as
the detectors are set to identical settings. So in this scenario, with both detectors set to
the middle position, and assuming we use D and U to represent Down and Up
polarization, then the result of this experiment will be exactly as summarized above for
scenario 1. That is, the outputs of the detectors will be identical.
Note that this is simply a quantum fact, that is, the outcome of a quantum
experiment: set the detectors up so that both are in their middle position, send
pairs of twin photons toward them, and the outcome will be that the detectors
register every pair of photons as either both being Up or both being Down.
Moreover, this result is exactly what quantum theory predicts.
Now change the photon detectors as in scenario 2 above. The detectors are no
longer both set to the same position, so we cannot expect to get identical readings
for each pair of photons. But as a matter of experimental fact, the result in this
scenario is exactly as depicted in the summary of scenario 2. Again this is simply a
quantum fact, and again is exactly what quantum theory predicts.
And likewise, change the photon detectors as in scenario 3 and the outcome is
again as depicted in the summary of scenario 3, and once again, this is simply a
quantum fact and is what is predicted by quantum theory.
So far, so good – nothing out of the ordinary. But now set the detectors as in
scenario 4, with A set to its left position and B set to its right position, and

279

280

Recent Developments

consider what results we would expect. Using the same notation as used for the
Coke machine analogy, these scenarios can be summarized as follows:
Scenario 1
A:M DUDDUDUUUDUDDUUDUDDUDUUUDUDD . . .
B:M DUDDUDUUUDUDDUUDUDDUDUUUDUDD . . .
Summary: identical outputs
Scenario 2
A:L DDUDUUDUDDUUDUDUUDUDDDUDUUDU . . .
B:M DUUDUDDUDDUUDUUDUDUDUDUDDUUU . . .
Summary: 25% difference
Scenario 3
A:M UUDUDDUDUUDDDUDUUUDUDUUDDUDD . . .
B:R UDDUDUUDDUDUDUDDUUUUDUDDDUDD . . .
Summary: 25% difference
Scenario 4
A:L ???
B:R ???
Summary: ???
So we ask the same question we asked of the Coke machines: If the locality
assumption is correct, and there is no communication or connection between the
two photon detectors, what is the maximum difference there can be between the
outputs of the two detectors? And again, the answer (which is essentially Bell’s
theorem) is that the maximum difference there can be between the outputs of the
two detectors will be 50%.
But here is the punch line: quantum theory does not agree with this 50% ﬁgure.
Instead, if the detectors are set as in scenario 4, quantum theory predicts there
should be an almost 75% difference between the outputs of the two detectors.
In other words, Bell discovered that predictions based on quantum theory, on
the one hand, and predictions based on the locality assumption, on the other
hand, do not agree. That is, the simple deduction illustrated by the Coke machine
analogy shows that, if the locality assumption is correct, then, when photon
detectors are set as in scenario 4, there can be at most a 50% difference between
the outputs of the detectors. But a prediction based on the mathematics of
quantum theory gives an expected difference of almost 75%.
In short, Bell showed that quantum theory and the locality assumption are
incompatible with one another. They cannot both be correct.

Aspect’s Experiments
Remember that Bell’s theorem, as I have presented it via the Coke machine
analogy, is essentially an experimental setup. As described, the experiment sounds
relatively straightforward. In fact, the experiment is technologically quite difﬁcult,

28 EPR, Bell’s Theorem, and the Aspect Experiments

and there was no way, when Bell produced this result in 1964, of actually carrying
it out. In the ensuing decades, however, a number of physicists worked on actually
carrying out Bell-type experiments. The best of these experiments were carried
out in Alain Aspect’s lab at the University of Paris during the late 1970s and early
1980s. (If you are curious, the main difﬁculty in carrying out this experimental
design is in assuring that there is no possibility of any connection or communi­
cation between the two detectors.)
To summarize the results of these experiments, Aspect’s experimental results
show that, in the conﬂict between the locality assumption and quantum theory,
quantum theory wins. That is, Aspect’s results indicate strongly that the locality
assumption is wrong. Since Aspect’s experiments in the 1970s and 1980s, these
results have been replicated and veriﬁed a number of times by a number of
different labs using a number of experimental setups. And these sorts of experi­
ments continue to be done. (As I write this, a number of particularly intriguing
Bell-like experiments are being conducted. I describe these brieﬂy in the Chapter
Notes.)
With respect to views on the nature of reality, the implications of Bell’s theorem
and Aspect’s results are substantial. Aspect’s results are quantum facts, and any
respectable view of reality must respect the facts. And these facts seem to dictate
that the locality assumption must be rejected.
However, we should be careful at this point. Recall that the locality assumption
was phrased somewhat loosely in the discussion above. The next major issue,
then, is to discuss the locality assumption with greater care, thereby clarifying the
implications of the Bell/Aspect results.

Locality, Nonlocality, and Spooky Action at a Distance
Recall that the two main goals of this chapter are (a) to explain recent experiments
that are often claimed to have substantial implications for our views of reality, and
(b) to analyze these alleged implications, especially with respect to the claim that
these experiments show that any “local” view of reality must be mistaken. At this
point we are ﬁnished with (a), and are ready to move on to (b). Let’s begin with the
rough statement of the locality assumption as it appeared earlier:
The Locality Assumption (rough version): What happens at one location
cannot inﬂuence what happens at another location unless there is some sort
of connection or communication between the two locations.
As mentioned earlier, there are various ways to understand the phrase “some
sort of connection or communication,” and the notion of “inﬂuence.” The ﬁrst
task, then, is to make these issues more precise.
There are good reasons to believe the speed of light is a sort of universal speed
limit. As such, we can exploit it to put constraints on the possibility of two events
being connected: namely, two events can only be connected if the amount of time
between the two events is at least as great as the amount of time it would take light
to travel between them. For example, there can be (and is) a connection between

281

282

Recent Developments

the event of me dialing my wife’s number on my phone, and the event of my wife’s
phone ringing a few seconds later. The time between the two events is greater
than the amount of time it would take light to travel between the two locations.
Thus, there is the possibility of a connection between these two events. And, of
course, the two events are in fact connected, and the nature of the connection is
pretty well understood.
In contrast, it takes approximately eight minutes for light to travel from the sun
to the Earth. So there can be no connection between an event happening on the
sun (a solar ﬂare, for example) and an event happening on the Earth (a disruption
of radio communications, for example), unless those two events are separated by
at least eight minutes.
Using this notion, we can put constraints on the notion of “some sort of
connection or communication.” In what follows, unless otherwise noted, we will
understand “connection” to mean the possibility of a connection, where there is a
possibility of a connection between two events if and only if the amount of time
between the two events is equal to or greater than the time it would take light to
travel between them. If there is no possibility of this sort of connection between
two events, then we will say that the second event occurred “at a distance” or,
equivalently, that the second event was “at a distant location.”
This leads to a more reﬁned version of the locality assumption. The emphasis
on the speed of light stems from Einstein’s theory of relativity, and this sort of
inﬂuence seemed to be the sort of inﬂuence that most worried Einstein (Einstein
once referred to this sort of inﬂuence as “spooky action at a distance”). Given this,
let’s call this Einstein Locality:
Einstein Locality: An event at one location cannot inﬂuence an event at a
distant location.
In the Aspect experiments, the events in question were indeed “at a distance,”
that is, the events were such that there could be no connection between the
events (again, unless that connection was faster than light). The details as to
how Aspect accomplished this were some of the most technologically chal­
lenging parts of the experimental setup, and basically he accomplished this by
an arrangement that was equivalent to rapidly and randomly (or at least quasirandomly) altering the positions of the detectors just before the photons
reached them. In short, Aspect managed to arrange the experiment so that
changes in the positions of the detectors occurred so quickly that there was no
time for any signal to pass from one detector to the other (again, unless that
signal traveled faster than light).
And in these experiments, there is some sort of inﬂuence between what
happens at one detector and what happens at the other. That is, events at one
detector (changing the position of the dial) inﬂuenced the events at the distant
detector (the odds of the distant detector matching the output of the other
detector). Thus, the Bell/Aspect experiments show that Einstein Locality is
mistaken. In short, the results of Aspect’s experiments, and subsequent replica­
tions of those results, leave little doubt that events at one location can inﬂuence
events at a distant location.

28 EPR, Bell’s Theorem, and the Aspect Experiments

As mentioned above, the notion of “inﬂuence,” as used in the deﬁnitions of the
locality assumption and Einstein Locality, is not an entirely clear concept. As a
ﬁnal (and important) topic in this section, it is worth discussing what can and
cannot be said about the “inﬂuence” pointed to by the Aspect experiments.
The word “inﬂuence” is often meant in the sense of causal inﬂuence, that is, in
the sense of one event causing another. Let’s take a minute to construe Einstein
Locality in terms of causal inﬂuence. Let’s call this Causal Locality:
Causal Locality: An event at one location cannot causally inﬂuence an event
at a distant location.
Do the Bell/Aspect experiments show Causal Locality is mistaken? This is a
difﬁcult question, with the main difﬁculty being in the notion of causation itself.
Generally, when we speak of causes, we have in mind examples of, say, errant
baseballs causing windows to break, broken glass causing ﬂat tires on our cars, the
impact of my ﬁngers on the keyboard causing the keys to depress, in turn causing
electrical signals to be passed from my keyboard to my computer, and so on.
However, these sorts of everyday causal inﬂuences are importantly different
from the inﬂuences revealed by the Bell/Aspect experiments. Most notably, these
everyday sorts of causes are ones that respect Einstein Locality, that is, none of
these everyday examples of causation involve faster-than-light inﬂuence. Since in
the Bell/Aspect experiments we are dealing with a different sort of inﬂuence, one
that does not respect Einstein Locality, relying on these everyday examples to
illuminate issues involving causation is probably too restrictive. It would be better
to look to a more general view of causation.
Fortunately, causation is one of our most extensively analyzed concepts,
especially in work since the beginning of the twentieth century involving the
philosophy of science. While there is a good deal of disagreement about speciﬁcs
of various proposals for understanding causation, there has emerged a general
agreement on at least a general framework for understanding causation. In
particular, it is generally accepted that an inﬂuence is a causal one if there is
a strong correlation between the events in question, and moreover, where that
correlation cannot be explained by any appeal to any common causes. (By
“common causes” I mean that the correlated events are correlated not because
one causes the other, but because both are the result of another, common cause or
causes. For example, my outside thermometer reading below 32 degrees Fahren­
heit and the water in the nearby pond being frozen are closely correlated. But
neither causes the other; rather, they are both the result of a separate, common
cause, namely, sufﬁciently cold weather.)
The results of the Bell/Aspect experiments appear to meet this criterion. That
is, there certainly is a strong correlation between the settings of one detector and
the readings at the other detector. And Aspect’s original experiments, and even
more so additional Bell/Aspect-type experiments conducted since Aspect’s
original experiments, have made it increasingly unlikely that these correlations
can be explained as a result of any common cause. (Some of these more recent
experiments are brieﬂy discussed in the Chapter Notes.) In short, given the usual
general framework for understanding causation, the original and ongoing Bell/

283

284

Recent Developments

Aspect-type experimental results appear to indicate a type of causation that is
faster than light. In other words, as with Einstein Locality, Causal Locality also
appears to be mistaken.
Before closing, it is worth considering one other common, and important, type
of inﬂuence. The inﬂuences I have in mind here are inﬂuences we can use to send
information. We employ such inﬂuences regularly throughout an ordinary day.
Text messages, phone calls, speaking with one another, sending signals with
Morse code, typing on computer keyboards, and so on, are examples of this sort of
inﬂuence. So let’s consider one ﬁnal type of locality, in particular, what we can call
Informational Locality:
Informational Locality: An event at one location cannot be used to send
information to a distant location.
Do the Bell/Aspect experiments show Informational Locality is incorrect? In
other words, can we exploit the inﬂuence between the events at distant locations
to send information? For example, could we set up a detector here on Earth,
another on Mars, and use a Bell/Aspect situation to instantaneously send
information between the two locations?
Nothing in the Bell/Aspect setup requires that the detectors be reasonably close
to each other. So in principle we could have one detector on Earth, another on
Mars (or in a galaxy millions of light years away, for that matter), and we would
still have the same result. That is, what happens at one detector will apparently
instantaneously inﬂuence what happens at the distant detector. This, then, might
tempt us to think we could exploit this inﬂuence to instantaneously send
information to distant locations, thereby violating Informational Locality.
Surprisingly, it appears we are unable to do this. That is, there appears to be no
way to exploit the Bell/Aspect setup to allow for the sending of any information
between the locations. To see why, it might help to focus on a concrete example.
Suppose you are at detector A, perhaps in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and I am at
detector B, perhaps 2,500,000 light years away in the Andromeda galaxy. Suppose
I keep the dial on my detector in the R position. Looking back at scenarios 3 and 4
above, we know that, if you have the dial on your detector in its M position, there
is only a 25% chance that what my detector registers will be different from what
your detector registers. But if you put your dial in the L position, the odds of my
detector reading differently than yours jump to 75%. In short, you can substan­
tially inﬂuence, and instantaneously inﬂuence, the odds of whether our detectors
match or fail to match simply by switching your dial between M and L. Since you
have so much inﬂuence on what happens at my detector, it seems you should be
able to exploit this inﬂuence to send information to me instantaneously, thereby
showing Informational Locality to be false.
However, here is the problem. To send me a message, you need to be able to
inﬂuence whether I receive a D or a U on my tape. Even if you could only
inﬂuence the probability of my receiving a D or a U, this would be sufﬁcient to
send me a message. So no question about it: if you could manipulate your dial so
as to inﬂuence whether I received a D or a U, then you could send me a message.

28 EPR, Bell’s Theorem, and the Aspect Experiments

The problem is, you do not have this sort of inﬂuence. Recall that in this setup,
the readings on your detector as well as those on my detector will be a random
50:50 mix of Ds and Us. So you cannot inﬂuence the odds of a D or U appearing on
your detector, nor the odds of a D or U appearing on my detector (again, those
odds will always be 50:50). You do have instantaneous inﬂuence on my detector,
but that inﬂuence is restricted to inﬂuencing the probability of whether what my
detector says matches what your detector says. And that kind of inﬂuence is not
sufﬁcient to send a message.
In general, there seems to be no way to exploit the inﬂuence of Bell/Aspect
setups to send information to a distant location. So contrary to how it initially
seems, the Bell/Aspect experiments give us no reason to think that Informational
Locality is false.
As a ﬁnal note in this section, during much of the twentieth century it was
widely accepted that relativity ruled out any sort of faster-than-light inﬂuences. So
the results of the Bell/Aspect experiments seemed to contradict this aspect of
relativity. When those results were announced, researchers turned to a more
careful analysis of what exactly relativity prohibited. It turns out that, strictly
speaking, relativity only prohibits faster-than-light inﬂuences that can be used to
send information. So the fact that the Bell/Aspect results do not violate Infor­
mational Locality is what keeps these results from contradicting relativity.
Notably, the fact that, strictly speaking, these results do not contradict relativity
would have made little difference to Einstein. When Einstein spoke of spooky
action at a distance, his concern was with any sort of faster-than-light inﬂuence.
He was convinced, as probably most of us have been since at least the ancient
Greeks, that we inhabit a world that does not allow for action at a distance, that is,
that we live in a world that respects all forms of locality. As it turns out, we have
been wrong about this.

Concluding Remarks
In summary, the Bell/Aspect experiments clearly demonstrate that Einstein
Locality is mistaken. That is, the experiments show that there can be some
sort of inﬂuence between events at distant locations. These results likewise seem
to indicate that there can be instantaneous causal inﬂuence between events at
distant locations. However, although there is some sort of inﬂuence involved, it
seems that the Bell/Aspect results do not give us any reason to think that the
inﬂuence can be used to send information between distant locations.
This leaves us, then, with the question of what kind of inﬂuence it is. This is a
question for which we can, at last, give a precise answer. The answer to the
question “What kind of inﬂuence is it?” is this: no one has the foggiest idea.

285

286

29
Overview of the Theory of Evolution
In recent chapters we looked at ways in which new developments, most notably
involving relativity theory and quantum theory, are requiring us to rethink
substantially some basic and long-held assumptions about the sort of universe
we live in. In this chapter and the next we will be exploring relatively recent work
(from the mid-1800s to the present) concerning evolutionary theory. As with the
discoveries discussed in previous chapters, evolutionary theory also forces us to
rethink some common and long-held views.
The chapter is divided into two main sections. The main goal of the ﬁrst section
is to understand the basics of evolutionary theory. Included in this discussion are
the original discoveries of Darwin and Wallace in the mid-1800s, an overview of
more recent discoveries concerning evolution, and a discussion of one of the most
common misconceptions about evolution. The second main section is largely
historical, exploring the route by which Darwin and Wallace independently
arrived at the key insights behind evolutionary theory.

Overview of the Basics of Evolutionary Theory
Darwin’s and Wallace’s discovery: Evolution by natural selection
Charles Darwin (1809–82) and Alfred Russel Wallace (1823–1913) were the ﬁrst
to clearly and thoroughly articulate and (especially in the case of Darwin) defend
what is referred to as evolution by natural selection. As described later in the chapter,
the route by which Darwin and Wallace came to understand evolution was lengthy,
and it required them to overcome some basic and widespread presuppositions
common in their time – presuppositions largely rooted in older Aristotelian views.
Generally speaking, evolution refers to changes in a population over time.
During Darwin’s and Wallace’s time it was widely accepted that members of a
species shared a set of fundamental, deﬁning, and unchanging characteristics, and
it was also accepted that new species do not emerge. However, eventually Darwin
and Wallace independently became convinced that both of these widely accepted
views were mistaken. This left them with the question of what sort of natural
mechanism might result in fundamental changes in a population, and even result in
new species. Both independently discovered what Darwin would term natural
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

29 Overview of the Theory of Evolution

selection. Although the route to Darwin’s and Wallace’s discovery was difﬁcult, once
recognized, the basic ideas behind evolution by natural selection can be stated quite
brieﬂy. Using modern terminology (as opposed to the phrasing used by Darwin and
Wallace), the key factors in the evolutionary process they discovered are these:
i) heritable variations
and
ii) differential ﬁtness.
Let’s take a minute to understand these. The idea behind heritable variations is
straightforward – it simply means that there are differences between members of
a population, and moreover, differences that can be passed down from one
generation to the next. Individual humans, for example, differ considerably from
one another, and many of those differences – eye color, hair color, and countless
others – are heritable, that is, they can be passed down to later generations.
With respect to the second ingredient, differential ﬁtness means that not all
members of the population are equally suited to survive and pass down their
traits in the environment in which they ﬁnd themselves. Consider a typical
biological population, say a particular population of deer living in a particular
area. Such a population will usually inhabit an environment in which there are
shortages of important resources such as food, suitable mating partners, and the
like. The environment will also usually include threats to their wellbeing and
survival, such as disease, accidents, predators, and the like. If the differences
between the heritable traits of members of this population are such that some
traits are more likely to aid an organism in surviving and reproducing in that
environment – perhaps some are more resistant to certain newly arisen
diseases, or the microbiome in the digestive system of some make them
more likely to survive with the limited food resources available during a
particularly harsh winter, and so on – then we would say that the population
exhibits differential ﬁtness. In short, the population is such that not all members
are equally suited to survive and reproduce in the environment in which they
ﬁnd themselves.
Darwin and Wallace recognized that if (i) and (ii) are present, and if the traits
responsible for the differential ﬁtness are heritable traits (which will generally but
not always be the case), then what Darwin termed natural selection will occur.
Darwin chose the term to emphasize the analogy with artiﬁcial selection. Artiﬁcial
selection refers to the process where breeders of animals or plants mate orga­
nisms with certain characteristics, characteristics desired by the breeder, with the
result that those characteristic become increasingly common in later generations.
Darwin and Wallace recognized that an analogous process can take place
through a natural mechanism of selection – natural selection. The basic idea is
relatively straightforward (though it was not easy to be the ﬁrst to recognize it): if
there are differences between members of a population where those differences
are heritable, and if the environment is such that certain of those heritable
features are more likely to result in an organism’s survival and reproduction in
that environment, then organisms with those features are more likely to pass such
features on to subsequent generations. In this way, a change in the population

287

288

Recent Developments

over time will result – certain features will be naturally selected and it is likely
those features will be increasingly prevalent in successive generations. In short,
evolutionary change will occur via an entirely natural mechanism.
As a ﬁnal note, Darwin and Wallace both recognized that if within a population
this process of natural selection continues for a long enough time, then changes in
a population can be so substantial that the result will be a population so different
from the original that it can properly be considered a new species. Thus the title of
Darwin’s groundbreaking book: On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural
Selection.
A brief overview of evolutionary theory since Darwin and Wallace
The history of the development of evolutionary theory since the time of Darwin
and Wallace is quite complex. Included in this are Mendel’s famous experiments
concerning hereditary factors in peas, the recognition of genes as “units” of
heredity, the discovery of chromosomes and the recognition that they are
involved in heredity, the subsequent discovery that chromosomes contain
DNA and the discovery of the molecular structure of DNA, the discovery of
the mechanism by which DNA codes for proteins, and in more recent years, the
ability to quickly ascertain the complete, molecule-by-molecule genetic structure
of a vast array of organisms, including the human genetic structure, and much,
much more. With respect to developments in evolutionary theory, the past
roughly 150 years have been remarkably productive.
The complete story of evolutionary discoveries since the time of Darwin and
Wallace is beyond the scope of this chapter. But I do want to note two relevant
items. The ﬁrst item concerns what is commonly termed the modern synthesis. In
the late 1800s and early 1900s there was an enormous amount of disagreement
and contention over central issues involving evolutionary theory, and in addition,
areas of biology relevant to evolutionary theory were working largely indepen­
dently of one another. But by the later twentieth century there was a synthesis of
an extraordinarily wide range of results and data, from ﬁeldwork involving studies
of populations in their natural environments, to controlled laboratory experi­
ments involving model organisms such as fruit ﬂies, to mathematical results
concerning evolution, work involving paleoanthropology (the study of extinct
human and related species) including the quite surprising recent discovery of
Neanderthal DNA, and many other areas. This synthesis – what is now widely
referred to as the modern synthesis – brought evolutionary theory into a uniﬁed
whole encompassing a wide array of ﬁelds of biological research. To cite an oftquoted phrase that comes from the title of a 1973 article by a key ﬁgure in
population genetics, Theodosius Dobzhansky (1900–75), “nothing in biology
makes sense except in the light of evolution.” Dobzhansky’s phrase, while perhaps
a bit of an overstatement, nonetheless nicely sums up how uniﬁed current areas of
biological research have become, with evolutionary theory as a core component.
As a second item before closing this section, we saw earlier that Darwin and
Wallace independently discovered natural selection as a mechanism behind
evolutionary change. However, since Darwin and Wallace several additional
factors contributing to evolutionary change have been discovered.

29 Overview of the Theory of Evolution

These additional factors are best understood in terms of a somewhat more
speciﬁc and more recent deﬁnition of evolution. We saw above that evolution has
long been understood as referring to changes in a population over time, where the
changes were generally understood to be changes in the overt characteristics of a
population. With the understanding of the role of genes in reproduction, and
especially the role of genes in the passing on of an organism’s heritable character­
istics, evolution is now commonly understood as referring to changes in the
genetic makeup of a population. More precisely, evolution is now generally
understood as changes in allele frequencies in a population over time.
The central idea behind this deﬁnition is straightforward. An allele is simply a
variant of a particular gene. For example, the single gene responsible for blood
type in humans has several variants, and these variants are referred to as the alleles
of that gene. (So what blood type you have depends on what variants you inherited
from your parents.) If a particular variant of a gene – an allele – becomes more
common or less common in a population over time, then evolution – change over
time – has occurred, though now we are focusing on changes in the genetic
makeup of a population.
The process of natural selection discovered by Darwin and Wallace is widely
recognized as an extremely important factor inﬂuencing evolution, that is,
inﬂuencing changes in the genetic makeup of a population over time. However,
several additional factors are now widely recognized as contributing to evolution,
these being gene ﬂow, genetic mutation, and genetic drift. Let’s look brieﬂy at
these additional factors.
Gene ﬂow (or gene migration, as it is also called) is perhaps most easily
understood by way of example. Recent evidence strongly suggests that at points
in the not too distant past – likely around 50,000–100,000 years ago – populations
of modern humans (our species) and populations of Neanderthals (a separate
human species that went extinct around 30,000–40,000 years ago) came to
inhabit the same regions. And they interbred. In doing so certain Neanderthal
gene variants became established in the genome (the genetic makeup) of modern
humans, and vice versa. Metaphorically speaking, there was a ﬂow of gene alleles
from one population to another, and this sort of process is referred to as gene ﬂow.
There are a wide variety of scenarios that may result in gene ﬂow. Different
populations of migrating animals, for example, often share similar feeding and
resting spots during migration. In so doing such populations may interbreed, with
the result that a population may have types of genes ﬂow into it that were not
previously present in that population. Gene ﬂow also affects plants, for example, a
population of plants may receive new gene variants by way of pollen that has been
carried a long way on the wind. In general, gene ﬂow refers to this sort of process,
that is, changes in the genetic makeup of a population due to the movement of
new gene variants into the population. And as noted, gene ﬂow is now widely
recognized as an important additional mechanism behind evolutionary change.
Genetic mutation is likewise now recognized as another factor in evolution.
Once the role of DNA in reproduction was understood, and the molecular
structure of DNA was established, it was found that mutations – changes in the
molecular structure of the DNA – may occur. Some such changes result from
internal processes. For example, the replication of DNA is an important factor in

289

290

Recent Developments

reproduction, and the replication process sometimes results in a slightly ﬂawed
copy – a mutation in the molecular structure of the DNA. Or external factors,
such as chemicals in the environment, radiation, and others, might also result in
an alteration of a portion of DNA. While many mutations are neutral, having no
appreciable effect on the organism, some are beneﬁcial in the sense of increasing
the likelihood of an organism’s survival and reproduction in its environment, and
some mutations are harmful. In this way, genetic mutation, often acting in
conjunction with natural selection, can likewise result in changes in the genetic
makeup of a population over time.
The ﬁnal factor to consider, what is termed genetic drift, is best approached by
way of analogy. The analogy differs in certain ways from processes involved in
genetic reproduction, but the analogy does convey the key idea behind genetic
drift. Suppose we have a container of 100 colored balls, where the percentages of
blue, red, and green balls are respectively 60%, 30%, and 10%. Suppose we
randomly choose 20 balls out of this container. Because the sample is random
it is unlikely to be exactly representative of the original frequencies of the colors;
instead, we can expect that the frequencies in our sample will have drifted from
the frequencies found in the original container.
With multiple generations, changes resulting from this sort of random drift
can become quite substantial. For example, Figure 29.1 contains a summary of a
quick computer simulation I just ran of the scenario above involving the
colored balls, but adding additional generations. GEN0 (generation 0) repre­
sents the original population of 100 colored balls with the 60%, 30%, and 10%
frequencies of blue, red, and green balls. GEN1 represents the frequencies
found in a random sampling of 20 balls from that original 100. For GEN2, we
again simulate a container of 100 balls, but this time having the frequencies of
blue, red, and green found in GEN1. Then we again randomly sample 20 balls
from this container, with the results summarized in GEN2 below. Then we
repeat the process for GEN3, GEN4, and GEN5. The results are summarized in
Figure 29.1.
Notice how dramatic the drift is. In only ﬁve generations we have gone from
frequencies of 60, 30, and 10% to frequencies of 80, 0, and 20%. Again it is
worth emphasizing that this drift in frequencies is entirely due to random
processes. The red balls, for example, had a particularly bad bit of luck

Figure 29.1 Results of genetic drift simulation.

29 Overview of the Theory of Evolution

between GEN2 and GEN3, and by GEN4 the red balls had entirely disappeared
from the population. If this had been an allele – a gene variant – then this
would represent an allele entirely disappearing from a population. And
barring the reintroduction of that allele, perhaps by gene ﬂow, that allele
is forever gone from the population.
Although the process of genetic reproduction is more complex than the simple
scenario involving the colored balls, it nonetheless involves the same sort of
sampling, though in the case of genetic reproduction the sampling involves alleles.
Whereas with the colored balls we saw drift resulting in a change in the
frequencies of colors over time (that is, over successive generations), with
biological populations we can expect drift to result in a change in allele
frequencies in a population over time. Or in other words, drift will result in
evolution in that population.
A few additional notes are in order before closing our discussion of genetic
drift. First, population size and the relative size of samples tend to have a
substantial effect on the amount of drift we would expect to occur. The larger
the population, and the larger the sample size, the less drift we would expect.
Likewise, smaller populations, as well as smaller sample sizes, are more likely to
result in dramatic drift. Notice that the sample size in the colored balls scenario
was 20% (that is, we sampled 20 balls out of a total of 100), which is relatively
small, and thus the somewhat dramatic drift we saw was not that surprising.
Nonetheless, as long as there are gene variants (different alleles) in a population,
then unless a sample size is 100% (which for all practical purposes will not happen
in biological populations), genetic drift will occur. And as noted, genetic drift is
now understood to be an important mechanism in evolution.
It is also worth noting that it is difﬁcult (perhaps for all practical purposes
impossible) to determine how much change in a population is due to genetic drift.
This is because changes in a population over time due to genetic drift, versus
changes due to natural selection, are difﬁcult (perhaps practically impossible) to
distinguish. Thus, while there is widespread recognition that both natural
selection and genetic drift play important roles in evolution, there is some
disagreement over how much of a role each plays.
Finally, two subtypes of genetic drift are worth noting, usually termed bottle­
neck effects and founder effects. Both are, in essence, cases where a sample size is
exceptionally small, at least temporarily. As an example of a bottleneck effect,
consider a scenario where a natural disaster results in almost all members of a
particular population being killed. The disaster has, in essence, resulted in an
exceptionally small sample size. As we saw above, an exceptionally small sample
size can be expected to lead to a dramatic amount of drift, and thus it is likely that
the frequencies of traits (or more precisely, the frequency of alleles) in subsequent
generations will differ considerably from the frequency found in the original
population.
As an example of a founder effect, suppose a small number of members of a
population move to a different location, no longer interbreeding with members of
the original population. We once again are dealing with what is an exceptionally
small sample size, though the reason for the small sample is different from the

291

292

Recent Developments

reasons found in cases of bottlenecks. But just as in the bottleneck effect, the allele
frequencies in subsequent generations will likely differ considerably from those
found in the original population.
Darwin’s and Wallace’s discovery of evolution by natural selection was an
extraordinarily important discovery. As noted, the past roughly 150 years have
been a remarkably productive period of research and discovery in ﬁelds related
to evolutionary theory. An enormous amount has been learned about the
additional mechanisms of evolution just discussed, the molecular basis of
heredity, our evolutionary past, and much more. As with relativity theory
and quantum theory, these discoveries have substantial implications for views
we have long held. We will explore some of those implications in the next
chapter, but ﬁrst let’s brieﬂy consider a common misconception concerning
evolutionary theory, and a few historical notes on the route to Darwin’s and
Wallace’s discovery.
A word of caution
There are many, many misconceptions about evolution. Most seem to stem from
a lack of understanding of even the basics of evolutionary theory. But there is one
misconception that I ﬁnd quite often even among those who understand most of
the basic points about evolution, including the key aspects of evolution discussed
above. It is worth taking a minute to discuss this misconception.
Let’s begin with a question one hears not uncommonly: If evolutionary theory
is correct, then why haven’t other animals evolved the sort of traits that humans
have? For example, why haven’t other species developed large brains, sophisti­
cated language, advanced tools, advanced intelligence, and so on? As is so often
the case, it is important to recognize the presuppositions a certain question or
approach makes. In this case, note the only way to make sense of such questions
is to recognize that they presuppose that certain traits such as intelligence,
language, tool use, and so on, are somehow inherently better traits, traits that, if
evolution is correct, we should then expect the evolutionary process to select
for such traits. And thus, the suggestion goes, if evolution is correct, then
organisms should be expected to evolve in the direction of such traits. At
bottom, this (mistaken) view of evolution is of evolution as a process that
pushes organisms in a certain direction, in particular in the direction of
acquiring traits that are inherently “better,” or inherently “higher,” or inherently
“more advanced.”
But evolution is no such thing. The traits that result from natural selection are
the traits that helped organisms survive and reproduce in the environment in
which they found themselves, whatever those traits might be. In this context there
are no traits that are inherently “better” or “worse,” no traits that are inherently
more advanced or less advanced, no species with traits that make them “higher” or
“lower” species in any meaningful sense of these words. There are just traits that
happened to have worked, for the population in question, in the environment in
which that population found itself.
For us, modern humans, certain traits have worked, such as upright posture,
large brains, the ability to harness ﬁre, sophisticated tool use, and more. But those

29 Overview of the Theory of Evolution

traits give no assurance of survival. This is easy to see by considering that there
have been many species of humans over the past roughly two million years
(ranging from about six to 15 or more human species, depending on how ﬁnely
one makes distinctions). Our kin species of humans had the same general traits as
us, but they all went extinct. In short, the overwhelming majority of species
sharing our general traits did not survive.
Evolution is not a process that moves in some preferred direction. To put it in
terms we have used earlier, evolutionary changes in a population are not due to a
teleological, goal-driven process. Rather, evolution is at bottom a goalless, mecha­
nistic process. As noted, mistaking evolution for a goal-directed, teleological
process is exceedingly common. Just yesterday, for example, in a respected
publication I saw this headline: “Sherpas Evolved to Live and Work at Altitude.”
But Sherpas did no such thing. The population of Sherpas did not develop traits in
order to survive; rather, some members survived (and reproduced) because they
had certain traits. And thus those traits became more prevalent in that population.
In my college days, a biology professor teaching a course on genetics hammered
into us the slogan that populations do not adapt to survive; they survive because
they adapt. I have to admit that at the time I did not fully understand the point.
Later, as I came to better understand and better appreciate the differences
between teleological processes and mechanistic processes, and teleological views
of how the universe works versus mechanistic views, I came to understand the
professor’s point – that evolution is not a goal-directed, teleological process, but is
instead a natural, mechanistic process.

Darwin’s and Wallace’s Paths to Natural Selection
As noted, the original key discovery of evolution by natural selection, the
combination of what we generally term heritable variations and differential
ﬁtness, is most famously associated with Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel
Wallace. In this section we explore how they came to recognize the fundamental
ingredients behind evolution by natural selection.
The main focus of this section is historical. If one is mainly interested in just the
basics of evolutionary theory, as described in the sections above, one can skip the
remainder of this chapter and move on to the next. However, Darwin’s and
Wallace’s discovery is of major importance, and I think it is worth understanding,
at least in outline, how that discovery came about. It also serves as another
example of a trend we have seen earlier in this book, namely, how major new
discoveries often require overcoming presuppositions that are common in one’s
time.
The development of Darwin’s views
In the early 1830s, Darwin accepted an offer to sail with the HMS Beagle in what
would be a long (ﬁve-year) journey around the world. This young Darwin began
the trip with reasonably standard beliefs for his time. Most notable among these
beliefs were (i) that God (for Darwin, this would have been the Christian God) had

293

294

Recent Developments

created all species, (ii) that species had essential characteristics that made them
the species they were, (iii) that species were immutable, that is, species did not
change their essential characteristics over time, and (iv) that new species did not
appear.
It is worth noting that these beliefs, with the exception of the ﬁrst, were
largely rooted in the Aristotelian tradition. Recall that on the Aristotelian
tradition, natural objects had a set of internal, essential characteristics that
made them what they were, and this would apply to biological species as well.
We noted in an earlier chapter ways in which various branches of science,
following the adoption of Newtonian physics in the late 1600s and early 1700s,
had become “Newtonized,” in the sense of moving away from the Aristotelian
approach and moving more toward a Newtonian approach. Biology would also
eventually move in this direction, but it came more slowly, and in fact the
development of evolutionary theory was a major factor in this transition. At the
time of Darwin and Wallace, these Aristotelian-based beliefs about species were
still well entrenched. As we will see shortly, overcoming this Aristoteliangrounded view of species would be a major breakthrough for both Darwin and
Wallace.
Back to the Beagle: while serving on this voyage, Darwin made extensive
observations and notes, and collected a huge number of specimens and fossils. His
specimens and observations eventually led him to recognize that organisms
display an extraordinary array of characteristics. This applied even within species,
that is, different members of the same species display an astonishing array of
variation. We can see that this recognition is leading Darwin away from the
standard view that members of a species share a set of essential characteristics.
Upon returning to England Darwin began a series of notebooks, which he
developed for about the next ﬁve years (roughly the last half of the 1830s), in
which he began exploring the idea that species might undergo “transmutation.” In
these notebooks we can see that Darwin is now also becoming convinced that new
species can and do come into existence. In short, Darwin is now doubting the key
presuppositions mentioned above, that is, he no longer accepts that species have
essential characteristics, that species are immutable, and that new species cannot
come into existence.
But this left Darwin with a substantial problem: How? How could members of a
single species come to have such variation? How could new species come about?
A well-known book at the time would help Darwin come to an important insight.
In the 1830s Darwin read Thomas Malthus’ (1766–1834) Essay on the Principle of
Population. Malthus noted that plants and animals, including humans, tend to
reproduce beyond what their environment can support. Malthus was interested in
different issues than Darwin, including arguing for certain social policies, but
Darwin recognized how Malthus’ work could help address the problem on which
he was focused.
The fact that organisms breed in greater numbers than the environment can
support would result in what Darwin termed a “struggle for existence.” That is,
not all organisms can survive in the environment in which they ﬁnd themselves. If
the variations Darwin had come to appreciate during his years on the Beagle
impacted an organism’s chances of survival, the result, he realized, would be

29 Overview of the Theory of Evolution

differences in the survival and reproductive success of individuals having different
variations.
Although he used different terms than we do now, Darwin was recognizing that
heritable variations within a population, coupled with differential ﬁtness (that is,
that different variations affect the odds of an organism surviving, or roughly,
Darwin’s “struggle for existence”), would result in a population undergoing
change over time. And from this it is not a huge step to realize that, given
sufﬁcient time, the slow accumulation of changes resulting from heritable
variations combined with a struggle for existence could result in substantial
changes in organisms, substantial enough to result in a population of organisms
we would classify as a new species.
As mentioned earlier, this process is what Darwin would later term natural
selection. Again, the idea behind this terminology is straightforward: breeders
practice artiﬁcial selection by breeding animals with desirable traits, with the
result being that later populations can differ quite substantially from earlier
populations. In a way somewhat analogous, in nature there is a natural selection
process. But whereas artiﬁcial selection is a goal-directed process, where breeders
try to assure that certain traits are found in later generations, the selection process
found in nature is a natural process, a mechanism by which certain traits come to
be represented more frequently in later populations. And whereas the sort of
selection performed by breeders can appropriately be termed artiﬁcial selection,
the selection produced by the natural process, involving heritable variations
coupled with differential ﬁtness, can appropriately be termed natural selection.
In short, by about 1840 Darwin had found a natural, nondivine mechanistic
process that explained how populations of organisms can undergo substantial
change, and also explained how new species can appear. He had, he was sure, hit
upon an extremely important idea.
But . . . Darwin did not publish. For that matter, he shared his important idea
with only a small handful of trusted friends. He did, in 1844, complete a short (by
his standards) work of just under 200 pages, explaining his key ideas and
providing arguments and evidence in support of those views. But Darwin did
not intend the manuscript to be published, at least, not while he was alive. Instead,
Darwin stashed the manuscript away with a note to his wife, asking her to see to its
publication should he die unexpectedly.
It would be 20 years from the time he ﬁrst recognized the role of the key
ingredients behind evolution by natural selection to the time he ﬁnally published
his ideas. During this period, through the late 1840s and much of the 1850s,
Darwin continued to work incessantly (Darwin was always, up to the day he died,
at work on one project or another). Much of this work would eventually
contribute in important ways, most notably by providing him with a large store
of empirical data to support his eventual writings on evolution.
In short, by the time Darwin did get around to publishing his big idea, he was
able to bring an enormous amount of data to bear on the subject. And it is exactly
this wealth of data in support of his ideas that sets Darwin off from all others.
Whereas others – most notably Wallace – might have independently come up
with the key ideas we call heritable variations and differential ﬁtness, Darwin had
both the ideas and the data to support it.

295

296

Recent Developments

The development of Wallace’s views
In the late 1840s, while Darwin was engaged in various other projects, Alfred
Russel Wallace was beginning the ﬁrst of multiple voyages that would be, in many
respects, reminiscent of Darwin’s voyage on the Beagle. The differences between
Darwin and Wallace, however, are notable. Unlike Darwin, Wallace did not come
from a wealthy, established family. He lacked the connections needed to get into a
university, and for that matter, he could not have afforded a university education.
Unlike Darwin, Wallace had to scrape by, and he did so largely by collecting
specimens to send back to England for sale to wealthy collectors.
Besides lacking the advantages that Darwin had, Wallace was also just unlucky.
For example, after four years of traveling, ﬁlling notebooks on his observations,
collecting specimens and the like, the ship on which Wallace was returning to
England caught ﬁre and sank, along with most of his specimens (save those he had
shipped back earlier) and most of his notebooks containing an enormous amount
of data.
Yet Wallace persevered. And very much like Darwin, during these voyages
Wallace was struck by the extraordinary range of variation he observed among
organisms, including organisms that according to the received view should have
been uniﬁed by a core of essential characteristics. Wallace was beginning to think,
as Darwin had earlier, that populations of organisms can undergo substantial
changes over time, and that new species might emerge.
As had earlier been the case for Darwin, Wallace did not at this time have an
account of how such changes might occur, or of how new species might emerge.
However, he became sufﬁciently convinced that new species do emerge that he
published a short paper, in 1855, saying as much. In essence, as had earlier been
the case for Darwin, at this point Wallace has only the ﬁrst piece of the puzzle, that
is, a recognition that heritable variations are somehow important.
According to Wallace’s account, the second key ingredient came to him in early
1858 while laid up with a malarial fever during another voyage. Wallace says that
during this fever it suddenly came to him that a “struggle for existence” (basically
differential ﬁtness), coupled with the variation he had already noted, would
provide a natural explanation for changes in populations over time. And, like
Darwin, he recognized that this mechanism would provide an explanation for
how new species can appear.
After recovering from the fever, Wallace quickly wrote out a short (roughly 20­
page) explanation of the key ideas. And, in a fascinating twist of history, Wallace
chose to mail the paper to Darwin. I say this is a “fascinating twist” because
Wallace could have had no way of knowing that Darwin shared similar ideas, or
even that Darwin was at all sympathetic to such ideas, much less that Darwin had
been convinced of these ideas for 20 years.
Wallace seems to have sent the paper to Darwin mainly because of Darwin’s
connections. Recall that Wallace and Darwin moved in very different social
circles. Darwin was on close terms with the most prominent names in British
science. Wallace was on close terms with no one of that sort. So Wallace, in his
cover letter with his paper, asked Darwin if he could pass the paper on to these
prominent ﬁgures.

29 Overview of the Theory of Evolution

Darwin’s receipt of Wallace’s paper was, to say the least, upsetting. The title of
Wallace’s paper itself says a lot: “On the Tendencies of Varieties to Depart
Indeﬁnitely from the Original Type.” In this short paper, Wallace does an
excellent job of characterizing both the key ingredients behind evolution by
natural selection. With respect to heritable variations, Wallace argues that
populations can exhibit variations that are indeﬁnitely different from ancestors
of those populations. With respect to the second key ingredient, what we term
differential ﬁtness, Wallace even uses the same phrase as Darwin, that is, Wallace
independently chose to characterize this as a “struggle for existence.” In short,
Darwin’s and Wallace’s key ideas, as articulated in Wallace’s paper and in
Darwin’s earlier unpublished writings, are so close as to be virtually
indistinguishable.
It was a tricky situation, especially for Darwin. Darwin clearly had the key ideas
earlier than Wallace, but Darwin had not prepared anything for publication.
Wallace, in contrast, clearly intended his paper to be published, and as soon as
possible. To make a long story short, the tricky situation was more or less
resolved, more or less to everyone’s eventual satisfaction, when some of Darwin’s
friends arranged to have Wallace’s paper, along with Darwin’s 1844 manuscript
and a new summary prepared by Darwin, presented together in late 1858 at a
meeting of a London scientiﬁc society. This 1858 presentation was the ﬁrst public
presentation of the key ideas of evolutionary theory.
However, this 1858 presentation of Wallace’s and Darwin’s key ideas made little
impact and caused little discussion. Shortly after this, Darwin set to work on an
extended presentation and defense of these key ideas, in a work he would title On
the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection.
Darwin’s On the Origin of Species
As noted, immediately following the 1858 presentation of his and Wallace’s
theory, Darwin went to work on a manuscript suitable for publication. This would
turn out to be an extraordinarily inﬂuential book, and the main goal of this section
is to provide an overview of this work.
During various periods over the preceding 10 years, Darwin had worked on a
detailed, scholarly, extremely thorough presentation of his key ideas together with
a detailed presentation, drawing on decades of his research, of empirical data
supporting his views. This manuscript, which Darwin sometimes referred to as his
“Big Book,” had grown to hundreds of dense pages, and was far from complete.
Darwin wisely took a new approach and started on a new, less dense presentation
of his ideas, and one aimed at a wider audience. This work would be completed
and published toward the end of 1859, and would be titled On the Origin of Species
by Means of Natural Selection (now standardly referred to as just the Origin of
Species, or sometimes just the Origin).
It is one thing to articulate a theory clearly, as Wallace did in his 20-page 1858
paper, and another thing to defend and provide compelling arguments for the
theory. The Origin of Species is, to my mind, as pivotal a work as Newton’s
Principia, discussed in earlier chapters. Much as Newton provided a slow,
accumulating amount of support for his key ideas, such that by the end of the

297

298

Recent Developments

Principia you have been treated to an impressive treatment of the explanatory
power of the new ideas, so also is the case with Darwin’s Origin of Species. In the
last chapter, Darwin describes his book as “one long argument,” and in this long
argument Darwin, like Newton, presents the key ideas slowly and carefully. The
cumulative effect is much like that of the Principia, in that by the end you have
seen an impressive display of the explanatory power of these new ideas.
Of the 14 chapters comprising the Origin of Species, it is the ﬁrst four that
contain the key points focused on above. Darwin focuses the ﬁrst chapter,
“Variation under Domestication,” on the almost entirely uncontroversial subject
of artiﬁcial selection, that is, of deliberate cultivation of traits in domestic animals
by means of selective breeding. In this chapter he manages to emphasize, using
well-known examples, the surprising range of variations found within domestic
animals, and how almost endless variations can be produced by artiﬁcial selection.
The next chapter, “Variation under Nature,” is focused on establishing that
there is in fact an astonishing array of heritable variation among wild populations
of plants and animals. Here as elsewhere, Darwin is able to draw upon decades of
his extensive observations and note-taking to establish the degree of variation
found in the wild.
In the third chapter, “Struggle for Existence,” he focuses on what we refer to as
differential ﬁtness. Here too the reasoning and evidence is convincing, so by the
third chapter, Darwin has provided compelling reasons and evidence supporting
that in typical populations we ﬁnd both a wide range of heritable variations and
differential ﬁtness.
As noted earlier in this chapter, any time you have a situation in which these
two ingredients are present, change in a population over time will occur. And in
the fourth chapter, “Natural Selection,” Darwin makes this explicit. He does so
largely by making explicit the analogy between natural selection and the artiﬁcial
selection discussed in the ﬁrst chapter. That is, in just the same way that artiﬁcial
selection produces a wide array of changes within populations of domestic
animals, so too we should expect natural selection to result in a wide range of
changes in populations among wild organisms. And, again drawing on his
experiences and data, he argues that this account explains better than any other
the relationships we see among organisms in the wild.
In short, by the end of the fourth chapter, Darwin has presented a compelling
case that natural selection must occur, and that its effects will be similar to the
effects of artiﬁcial selection, namely, the production of organisms that can differ
to almost any extent from their earlier ancestors. The remainder of the book deals
with a variety of topics, such as objections to the theory, the issue of the age of the
Earth and whether there has been sufﬁcient geological time for small changes to
accumulate sufﬁciently so as to result in the range of organisms we see today, the
issue of the incompleteness of the fossil record, and the like.
As stressed earlier, the key ideas of Wallace and Darwin ran counter to
some deeply entrenched beliefs of the time. The scientiﬁc community needed
a work such as the Origin of Species to provide a compelling case that these
long-held, deeply entrenched views were mistaken. And only Darwin, with his
range of experiences and extensive collection of data, could have written such
a book.

29 Overview of the Theory of Evolution

The reception of the Origin of Species

The Origin of Species sold exceptionally well, and Darwin oversaw six editions of
the work during his life, each with multiple printings. In addition, the work was
translated into a number of languages other than English. The book quickly
became very well known.
However, throughout the remainder of the 1800s, and to some extent into the
ﬁrst decades of the twentieth century as well, Darwin’s key ideas were only partly
accepted. Darwin’s views that evolution occurs, that is, that populations of
organisms undergo change over time, and that new species emerge, were widely
accepted. This itself is a substantial accomplishment, given the standard belief
prior to and during Darwin’s time that species are immutable and new species do
not come into existence.
What may come as a surprise is that Darwin’s and Wallace’s view that natural
selection is the mechanism by which evolution occurs was widely rejected during
the last half of the 1800s. As it turns out, Darwin and Wallace were entirely
correct about natural selection being a key mechanism behind evolution. The
complete story of why, in the late 1800s, natural selection was widely rejected as
the primary mechanism behind evolution is beyond the scope of this chapter.
Sufﬁce it to say that part of the reason had to do with a lack of understanding of
the means of inheritance, part had to do with the widespread appeal of Lamarck­
ian views of evolution (roughly, the idea that traits acquired during an organism’s
life could be passed down), and more. As usual, for those interested in pursuing
this further, some suggestions are provided in the Chapter Notes.
Eventually, a variety of discoveries, notably including Mendel’s pea-breeding
experiments strongly suggesting that heritable traits, rather than being blended in
later generations, were instead passed down via some sort of “unit” of inheritance
(units that would later be termed genes); an important proof published in 1930
showing that, contrary to a widely accepted view, Mendel’s discoveries about units
of inheritance were fully compatible with Darwin’s and Wallace’s view of natural
selection as a key mechanism behind evolution; the discovery in the 1950s of the
structure of DNA and, in subsequent years, the ﬂeshing out of the role of DNA in
genetic inheritance; and much more, would show that Darwin and Wallace pretty
much got it right from the beginning. It is now widely understood that natural
selection is a key factor behind evolution, and that this process, over immense
lengths of time, is responsible for the wide variety of species we see today.

Concluding Remarks
It is difﬁcult to overstate how much we have learned about our origins, and about
the origins of life in general, over the past 150 years. These are remarkable times.
In this chapter we have focused primarily on relatively straightforward and
uncontroversial topics, especially the basics of evolutionary theory and the route
by which Darwin and Wallace came to recognize the role of natural selection. As
is well known, evolutionary theory raises some difﬁcult and controversial issues,
largely issues of a more philosophical and conceptual nature. In the next chapter,
we turn to an exploration of some of these difﬁcult issues.

299

300

30
Reﬂections on Evolution
In the previous chapter we focused on relatively uncontroversial topics. We focused
mainly on the basics of evolutionary theory and the route by which Darwin and
Wallace came to their discoveries. In the roughly 150 years since Darwin’s and
Wallace’s work, the broad outlines of evolutionary theory have become extremely
well conﬁrmed. There is no serious doubt that we, as with all current life on Earth,
got here via a long evolutionary process. The recognition of this has implications for
a variety of issues that are, to put it mildly, rather touchy – religion, for one, ethics for
another, and much more.
The potential implications of evolution are sufﬁciently broad and touch upon
so many topics as to make it impractical, in a chapter such as this, to consider
them all. I have opted to divide the chapter into three general sections. The ﬁrst
focuses on the implications of evolution for religious views; the second focuses on
implications for morality and ethics; and the third presents some empirical
studies that shed light on the likely evolutionary advantages and possible origins
of some of our most basic behaviors.
As this chapter is rather long, each section is self-contained. That is, nothing in
any section presupposes familiarity with material from the other sections.
Depending on your interests, you may wish to focus on all or on only one or
two of the topics. We will begin with a look at implications our understanding of
evolution has for common religious views.

Implications for Religion
The question of whether evolution leaves any room for belief in a religious sort of
deity has received a good deal of attention, especially in recent years. On the one
hand are a number of scholars who, in a nutshell, maintain that any traditional
notion of a creator God, one involved in and inﬂuencing the everyday workings of
the universe, and any traditional notion of humans occupying a special place in a
universe with any sort of overall purpose to it, has been shown by science in
general and evolution in particular to be at least superﬂuous if not almost
certainly false. In contrast, some scholars have argued that one can fully accept
Darwinian evolution and natural science, and still hold to a belief in a God who is
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

30 Reﬂections on Evolution

involved in meaningful ways in what goes on in the universe, and in a universe
with a purpose and one in which humans, at least in some sense, are special. My
goal in this section is to provide a sense of the arguments presented on both sides
of this issue. At bottom, the question at the core of this debate is this: Does taking
evolutionary theory seriously leave any room for anything like the traditional
western view of God?
Dennett, Dawkins, Weinberg, and others: “no”
A number of prominent scholars from a variety of disciplines, including physics,
biology, and philosophy of science, have argued that the answer to the above
question is a clear “no.” Such scholars would include Daniel Dennett, Richard
Dawkins, E. O. Wilson, Stephen Weinberg, and many others.
For such scholars, our best empirical theories, especially evolutionary theory,
leave no room for anything like the view of God common in the western world.
For example, consider the idea of a creator God who planned the universe with a
sort of detailed blueprint, with a particular focus on the development of life and
especially human life, and then implemented that plan. Such a blueprint-like plan
for the universe and for life in the universe is directly counter to what we have
discovered about the evolutionary origins of life. Thus, a belief in this sort of a
creator God with a blueprint-like plan for the universe and for the development of
life is incompatible with modern science, especially evolutionary theory.
Nor would it be acceptable to have a God that, instead of implementing a
detailed sort of blueprint, played only a kind of minimalist role in the development
of species. It is not uncommon to hear that one can fully accept both evolution
and a God that is importantly involved in the development of life by accepting that
God only occasionally interferes with the natural evolutionary process. The idea is
that this God sometimes steps in to push the evolutionary process in a certain
direction, for example, a direction that assured that humans would develop.
The problem with this view, these and other scholars argue, is that fully
accepting evolution requires fully accepting the central idea of evolution. Con­
sider the central idea of natural selection. The “natural” part of natural selection is
core. So fully accepting evolution requires accepting it as a natural process – no
supernatural forces or supernatural inﬂuences allowed. If one allows for a God to
step into and alter this process, then it is no longer natural selection – it is
supernatural selection.
More generally, the common conception of a God who intervenes and affects
the course of everyday events, say by answering prayers, is not compatible with
taking natural science as a natural process. Science since the 1600s has amply
demonstrated that the universe unfolds according to natural principles, and as
noted, developments in evolutionary theory over the past 150 years show that this
applies to the way life has unfolded as well. Thus, fully accepting the account
provided by modern science, and as regards life the account provided by modern
evolutionary theory, leaves no room for a God who intervenes in and affects the
course of everyday events. Since the beginnings of natural science around 600 BCE,
natural science has had at its core the central notion that the world proceeds
according to natural principles. Thus accepting supernatural inﬂuences is not

301

302

Recent Developments

compatible with the most important characteristic of natural science, nor is it
compatible with the most important feature of evolution by natural selection.
As a corollary to what has already been said, the evolutionary account is
incompatible with the view that humans are special in any interesting sense of the
word. The evolutionary account entails that humans are just one of millions of
species currently still existing, but as discussed in the previous chapter, there is no
meaningful sense in which humans, or human traits, are any “higher” or better or
more special than, say, the traits of dust mites that allow them to survive for long
periods of time on a few ﬂakes of dead skin. In short, accepting the evolutionary
account requires us to give up the belief, common in traditional western religion,
that humans might be special in any interesting sense of the word.
In summary, the scholars whose views we have been discussing argue that
evolutionary theory provides an important ﬁnal piece of a picture that has been
developing for some time. In particular, evolutionary theory provides a natural
explanation for the last remaining phenomenon that seemed previously to call for
a supernatural explanation, that is, evolutionary theory provides a completely
natural mechanism that accounts for the complexities we ﬁnd in living things. At
this point, then, in a scientiﬁcally informed and intellectually honest worldview
there is no longer any room left for a belief in a God with the key characteristics
typically associated with the western view of God, nor any room for belief in a
universe with any large-scale grand purpose.
These scholars emphasize that the sorts of questions we are concerned with
here – questions about the origin of the universe, about the way events in the
universe unfold, about the development of life – are empirical questions. As
empirical questions, we should look to the empirical evidence, and our best
supported empirical theories, to decide on the most reasonable views about such
matters. And if the empirical evidence and our best empirical theories suggest, as
they seem to, that there cannot be a God of the sort common in western religions,
then so be it. We have to accept this, and move on.
Haught, process philosophy, and process theology
The reasoning above seems compelling. But some scholars have argued that one
can, in an intellectually honest way, fully accept natural science in general and
evolutionary theory in particular, and still believe in a God that has, at least in
some sense, some of the important characteristics envisioned by most western
religions. The main goal of this section is to outline the views of one such scholar,
who in recent years has articulated this position more thoroughly than most.
John Haught is a modern theologian, well acquainted with evolutionary theory
and willing to fully accept the general correctness of the evolutionary account.
Haught would agree with a good deal of what has been said in the previous two
sections. For example, he would agree that the “natural” part of natural science
and natural selection is core. If one is to fully accept the natural part of natural
science and natural selection, Haught argues, one must accept that modern
science, especially evolutionary theory, leaves no room for a God that interferes
with the evolutionary process or that directly interferes with the natural workings
of the universe.

30 Reﬂections on Evolution

Likewise, Haught agrees that modern science, and evolutionary theory in
particular, leaves no room for belief in a universe that develops according to a
detailed, blueprint-like plan. And he also accepts that humans cannot be viewed
as special in the way western religions have traditionally viewed humans as
special. In particular, humans cannot be thought of as the intended product of the
evolutionary process.
In short, Haught certainly thinks modern science, especially evolutionary
theory, has substantial implications for religious views. And he thinks such
considerations call for substantial changes in the way God has been conceived
in past centuries. But he sees the changes required by taking evolution seriously as
being good changes. Haught argues that careful consideration of the implications
of evolution leads to a conception of God that is better than any the western world
has had previously. Thus, Haught speaks of “Darwin’s gift to theology.” Haught’s
views are subtle and nuanced, and I should note that what follows is but an
overview of some aspects of those views.
First, Haught argues that giving up the typical notion of a creator God who,
working from a detailed blueprint, produced a ﬁnished (or nearly ﬁnished)
universe ages ago, is a good thing to give up. To get an idea of his reasoning
here, consider the following analogy. Suppose I decide to build something, for the
sake of the discussion suppose it is a small pool for our back deck, built from
natural stone and maybe with a nice fountain in the center. I acquire some
blueprints, assemble the materials, and over the course of some days or weeks
build it. Once I am ﬁnished, what is left to do? My wife and I would presumably
enjoy it, probably a lot at ﬁrst and less so as the years went on and the novelty wore
off. We could perhaps stock the pool with some goldﬁsh or similar species, and
occasionally restock the pool as needed. But in general, with this sort of creation,
one that is essentially completed shortly after it is begun, there is not much to do
once the creation is ﬁnished.
This sort of creation seems to be a common view among adherents of typical
western religions. For example, recent polls indicate that in the United States
close to half the population believes the creation of the universe was begun and
ﬁnished by God within the last 10,000 years, with the creation process being
essentially completed at the beginning. And if one asks what goes on in the world
following this initial act of creation, a common view is of the world as a sort of
testing place where one proves, for example, one’s worthiness for salvation.
Haught does not describe it quite this way, but one gets the sense that he thinks
this notion of a God, one who produced a ﬁnished universe shortly after the
beginning of creation, with subsequent time spent with the world as a testing
place, is, well . . . boring. It is just not a very interesting conception of God or of
creation. God creates and ﬁnishes the universe at the outset, then century after
century after century the same thing happens. People are born, are tested, they
pass the test or not, and then the same process is repeated over and over and over.
This is not an interesting conception of God, or of creation, or of the overall
purpose of the world. And this is, I think, part of what Haught has in mind when
he speaks of Darwin providing a gift to theology. Darwin, Haught says, has forced
theologians to rethink these big questions about God, creation, and the purpose of
the universe.

303

304

Recent Developments

Haught envisions a very different sort of God and different sort of creative
process. He argues that this differently conceived God, and this creative process,
are not only compatible with modern science but also more interesting and more
in keeping with key principles underlying western religion. His theological views
have ties to the work of the philosopher Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947),
and also to the scientist/theologian Pierre Tielhard de Chardin (1881–1955). A
few brief words on Whitehead and de Chardin are in order.
In addition to some important foundational work in logic and mathematics
early in the twentieth century, Whitehead is most closely associated with what is
termed process philosophy. In a nutshell, process philosophy views processes as
more fundamental than objects. That is, instead of viewing objects as the
fundamental constituents of reality, and then viewing events, change, and other
processes as arising out of the interactions of those basic objects, process
philosophy reverses this order. Processes are now viewed as fundamental, and
objects are viewed as arising out of processes and events.
This is, of course, nothing more than the most basic sketch of one aspect of
process philosophy. But it is enough to see how from such a perspective, the
world, including objects in the world, can only be understood in terms of the
constantly ongoing events and changes and processes and relationships out of
which objects in the world arise. The world, then, and things in the world, are not
static entities, but rather are constantly evolving processes.
Whereas Whitehead is closely associated with process philosophy, de Chardin
is closely associated with process theology. Different process theologians differ on
the details, but in general, they tend to agree that the old conception of God as an
independent agent who created the world and now stands separate from that
creation should be replaced with a notion more in keeping with process
philosophy. In such a conception, God is seen not as a thing existing separately
from the world, but instead is viewed as part of (or perhaps the sum of, or future
of) the ongoing, constantly changing, constantly evolving processes that underlie
the world. In this way, God is viewed as being a constant participant in the world.
Not a participant in the sense of a being who coercively interferes with how events
unfold in the world, but rather, by being involved in the processes that are
constantly unfolding, and unfolding according to natural principles.
Again, this is nothing more than the most cursory sketch of one aspect of
process theology, but it is enough to see how process theologians view God quite
differently from the way God has traditionally been viewed in western religions.
Haught is working within this broad tradition of process philosophy and process
theology. And, he argues, as an ongoing creative process in which new types of
organisms and new species are constantly evolving, evolutionary theory not only
ﬁts in with this sort of theology but enhances it.
Moreover, Haught argues that evolution could only take place in a universe that
has the right sort of balance between order and randomness. Too much order
would not allow the sort of chance events required for the evolutionary develop­
ment of life on Earth. On the other hand, a universe with too much chance, too
much randomness, would not allow for the regularity needed for life to develop as
it has in our evolutionary past. And given the sort of balance between order and
randomness we see in the universe (which presumably can be traced back to the

30 Reﬂections on Evolution

conditions present at the beginning of the universe), the universe could be
expected to unfold in a certain broad way. Not unfold in a precise, predetermined
direction, but rather, unfold at least roughly in a certain direction, and a direction
that includes the eventual development of some sort of complex, intelligent life.
Not necessarily (or even probably) human life, or any of the particular species that
happen to be alive today. But given the initial conditions of the universe, Haught
argues that life was likely to develop somewhere in the universe, and among the
varieties of life that could be expected to appear, some sort of intelligent life,
capable of understanding and appreciating the universe, was likely to appear.
So in Haught’s theology, the universe was not created by God such that it was,
like the pool and fountain on my deck, fully planned and nearly fully completed
shortly after the creation. Nor was it created so that it would unfold according to a
speciﬁc, blueprint-like plan. Nor are the day-to-day workings of the universe
planned by God, nor does this God interfere in the day-to-day workings of the
universe. God is not some sort of “thing” existing separately and independently
from the universe. Rather, the ongoing unpredictable processes, including evolu­
tionary processes, that make up the universe mean that each moment the universe
is different, each moment there is an ongoing creative process. And as Haught
phrases it, this is a universe that is always being drawn, so to speak, toward the
future. And God, Haught argues, is the future toward which, somewhat meta­
phorically, the universe is constantly being drawn.
Conceived of in this way, God is intimately involved in the universe and in the
ongoing creative processes that arise from the balance between chaos and order.
The universe, then, is not engaged in just some sort of “meaningless rambling.”
Rather, the universe has a purpose to it, tied to the way it is unfolding roughly in a
certain direction, and unfolding entirely in accordance with natural principles
including the principles at the core of evolutionary theory.
The above is but a brief sketch of parts of Haught’s views. It is a view that clearly
goes beyond empirical science and empirical evidence (more on this below). But it
is a view, Haught would maintain, that fully accepts evolutionary theory, and fully
accepts the implications of modern natural science in general. Yet within this
framework, he argues, there is still room for a God who participates in the
universe. Not by interfering with what takes place, but rather by being part of
the processes that underlie the universe. And humans are in a sense special. Not
in the sense that the universe was made for humans, or that humans were the
intended outcome of the evolutionary process. But rather, given the initial
conditions at the beginning of the universe, and the appropriate balance between
randomness and order, some sort of intelligent beings were likely to result. And at
least one intelligent being that emerged happens to be us.
Discussion
We have largely focused in this section on the questions of whether one could
fully accept the implications of evolutionary theory, and more generally fully
accept the implications of natural science, and still believe in some sort of God
who is involved in the workings of the universe in an interesting way, and in a view
of humans as in some way special, and in a universe that has some sort of overall

305

306

Recent Developments

purpose to it. Above we looked at the views of a number of prominent scholars
who have argued, in a nutshell, that the answer is “no.” In contrast, Haught argues
that the answer is “yes.”
What are we to make of this disagreement? I think much of it stems from
differing views on what emphasis one thinks should be put on empirical evidence.
Is empirical evidence the only, and ﬁnal, word? The scholars in the ﬁrst camp
would argue that beliefs about the universe are empirical beliefs, and that the only,
or at least the primary, evidence for such beliefs must be empirical. And they
argue that the empirical evidence does not leave much if any room for a
traditional sort of God.
Haught agrees that empirical evidence is very important. However, he is quite
clear that he thinks some beliefs about the universe – for example, providing what
he calls an “ultimate explanation” for certain features of the universe – is outside
the realm of natural science and is a legitimate function of theology, rather than
being solely a matter of straightforward empirical evidence.
Importantly, note that the two camps are not arguing about the empirical
evidence. By and large they agree on that. Rather, the disagreement stems from
differences in fundamental beliefs about how much emphasis to put on empirical
evidence. Those in the ﬁrst camp would say that when it comes to beliefs about
the nature of the universe, empirical evidence trumps. Beyond empirical evidence,
there is no further inquiry to engage in. Haught, on the other hand, would not
accept that inquiry must stop where the empirical evidence stops.
If this situation sounds familiar, it should. Recall the disagreement, discussed in
Chapter 17, between Galileo and Bellarmine over what evidence trumps what in
considerations about whether the sun moves around the Earth or the Earth moves
around the sun. If one has at the core of their beliefs, as Galileo did, that when
forming one’s beliefs about the universe empirical evidence should overwhelm­
ingly have priority, then I think one cannot consistently accept both a Darwinian
evolutionary picture and any sort of traditional God, or even the sort of
nontraditional God that Haught envisions.
But if one has a different set of core beliefs, then perhaps one can consistently
accept both the evolutionary picture and the sort of God that Haught envisions.
That is, if one has the sort of core jigsaw puzzle pieces similar to what are almost
certainly some of Haught’s core pieces, then perhaps one can fully accept the
Darwinian evolutionary account, and accept natural science in general, and still
believe in a God that, while certainly far from the traditional God of western
religions, is nonetheless involved in (or better, is part of) the universe.
As a ﬁnal note, it is perhaps worth pointing out that the disagreement between
the two camps is probably unresolvable, at least unresolvable by means of rational
argument. The central problem is an old one, recognized at least as early as the
time of the ancient Greeks, and one that is sometimes referred to as the “problem
of the criterion.” This problem is explained more fully in the Chapter Notes, but in
a nutshell the problem arises when two sides disagree on the proper criteria to use
in evaluating beliefs. In this case, one camp views empirical evidence as the only
(or at least as the overwhelmingly primary) criteria to use in arriving at correct
beliefs; the other camp does not. And when two sides disagree on an issue as basic
as how to go about arriving at proper beliefs – that is, they disagree on what

30 Reﬂections on Evolution

criteria should be used to evaluate beliefs – there is generally not much chance of
either side convincing the other, at least not by rational argument.

Morality and Ethics
A great deal has been written about implications our understanding of evolution
has for our views of morality and ethics. We cannot explore all such views, but
instead we will look at two general claims about evolution and morality, with an
eye toward getting a ﬂavor of some of the substantial implications recent scholars
have argued result from our understanding of evolution.
Some scholars have argued that our understanding of evolution requires we
accept that key aspects of our ethics and morality are, in a certain important sense,
an illusion. Consider, for example, the sense of objectivity that accompanies many
of our moral judgments, especially on controversial topics. Abortion provides a
good example. Opponents of abortion tend to feel that abortion really is wrong,
objectively wrong. In expressing opposition to abortion, the sense is that they are
not merely expressing a subjective preference, as with a preference for certain
ﬂavors of ice cream; rather, they are expressing, they say, something that is
objectively correct.
In the times we are feeling a deep moral sentiment, for example a deep sense of
outrage at a rape, or a brutal murder, or child abuse, I think it is safe to say we all
have this sense of objectivity – we have the feeling that the action really is wrong.
This sense of objectivity is strong, and widespread. How are we to understand this
sense of objectivity, especially since it seems increasingly clear that our moral
sentiments are as they are largely because in some way they provided an evolu­
tionary advantage, and not because our moral sentiments reﬂect an objective
feature of the world?
A number of writers, most notably Michael Ruse and E. O. Wilson, have argued
that our sense of the objectivity of moral judgments was crucial in our evolu­
tionary history, in particular, crucial for morality to have performed the evolu­
tionary task that it has. And, presumably, that sense of objectivity is necessary for
morality to perform the task it continues to do.
The idea is that moral judgments play an important role in shaping ours and
others’ behavior, and in order to play this role, such judgments need to have a
sense of objectivity about them. Judgments that we view as subjective do not carry
the weight, the ability to mold behavior, that objectively viewed judgments have.
Take subjective ice cream preferences, for example. I may disagree with you about
your actions in choosing a certain ﬂavor of ice cream. But the subjectivity of such
preferences means I do not care about trying to change your behavior. In contrast,
I and others have a great deal of interest in changing behavior of yours that we
judge to be morally offensive, and the seeming objectivity of our judgments is
crucial in motivating us to get you to change such behavior. This is the sense in
which the seeming objectivity of moral judgments was and is crucial in morality
playing the evolutionary role it has.
But we can now see, from understanding the evolutionary origins of our moral
sentiments, that this sense of objectivity is an illusion. Strong moral sentiments do

307

308

Recent Developments

not reﬂect something that is objectively real, but it seems to be objectively real. So
this sense of objectivity is an illusion. But it is an important illusion. And unlike
some illusions, it is not one that disappears once it is pointed out.
An analogy might help clarify this. There is general agreement that phenome­
nal colors, for example, our experience of red, the redness of red, so to speak, is
not an objective feature of objects. Rather, objects appear red as a result of the way
our particular visual systems evolved and the way our visual systems respond to
characteristics of the light striking our retinas. Had organisms such as us, with the
types of visual systems we have, never appeared, there would be no redness. Thus
redness is a subjective feature of the way our visual systems respond to certain
features of light, rather than an objective feature of the world.
So from modern science we can understand that our experience of redness is
not an objective feature, but rather a subjective feature, and one with its roots in
our evolutionary history. But even if we understand all this about the lack of
objectivity of a color such as red, we continue, and must continue, seeing certain
types of objects as being red. We are simply built that way.
Scholars such as Ruse argue that our morality is likewise part of how we are
built. We can no more stop viewing certain acts as morally wrong – and feeling
that they are objectively morally wrong – any more than we can stop viewing
certain objects, such as a typical ripe apple, as red. In this way, then, this new and
insightful understanding of the illusory nature of the sense of objectivity that
accompanies moral judgments will not, these writers argue, lead us to behave in
morally different ways. But it is an important insight into our sense of morality.
Another important point in properly understanding these views – and this is a
distinction that is easy to miss – is recognizing that such scholars are not arguing
that morality is not, in any sense, real. There is an important sense in which our
morality, and redness, are real. What redness is not, and what morality is not, is
objective, that is, they do not reﬂect features of the world that exist independently
of humans. Instead, redness and morality are subjective features, dependent on
humans, and resulting in large part from of our evolutionary history. Had humans
(or similar organisms) not existed, neither redness nor our sort of morality would
have existed. But humans do exist, and we did have the evolutionary past we had,
and we do have the visual systems and moral sense that we have. Redness and
morality are thus real, even though they are not objective, independently existing
features of the world. We might say that they are real but not (objectively) Real.
Let’s turn now to another implication evolution has been argued to have for our
views of morality and ethics. There is a broad branch of ethical theory, with a long
history, which has as its primary focus views on what are and are not ethically
correct ways of behaving. This branch of ethical theory is generally termed
normative ethics.
Within the ﬁeld of normative ethics, for some centuries it has been widely
accepted that one cannot deduce an “ought” claim from a mere “is” claim. This
has come to be known as the naturalistic fallacy. In brief, the idea is that a mere
“is” statement – that is, a statement of fact, something merely descriptive – cannot
by itself justify any conclusions about how one ought to behave.
Observations about the evolutionary origins of our moral sentiments, and
evolutionary considerations in general, seem clearly to be descriptive statements,

30 Reﬂections on Evolution

that is, they are “is” claims. Take, for example, the discussion above about the
evolutionary origin of our sense of objectivity regarding ethical views. This is a
descriptive claim, an “is” claim – that our sense of the objectivity of moral
judgments is rooted in the evolutionary role the sense of objectivity played.
But if evolutionary claims are descriptive, “is” claims, then given the naturalistic
fallacy, it would seem on the face of it that evolutionary considerations could not
possibly have any impact on our views concerning normative ethics.
Some authors, such as Ruse, disagree. They agree that the naturalistic fallacy is
a fallacy, and they agree that evolutionary claims are “is” claims, but nonetheless
argue that evolutionary considerations have a major impact on our views of
normative ethics.
The key idea is this. Notice that the naturalistic fallacy allegedly occurs when
one deduces an “ought” claim from an “is” claim. But, Ruse argues, evolutionary
considerations are not showing us how to deduce normative ethical claims; rather,
evolutionary considerations are explaining normative ethical claims. For example,
evolutionary considerations can explain why we have the normative ethical
leanings we do, how such ethical leanings were and probably still are advanta­
geous, why they have the feel of being objective, and the like. But having explained
this, there is nothing more to be explained, nothing more to be done, with respect
to normative ethical issues.
To clarify this, it might help to contrast this view with the way normative ethics
has traditionally been viewed. A standard approach to normative ethics is to argue
for a particular normative ethical theory. Consider, for example, the normative
ethical theory termed utilitarianism. This is basically the normative ethical theory
that takes, as its basic principle, the “greatest good for the greatest number” view.
That is, on this view one ought to do whatever action will maximize the greatest
good for the greatest number. (What I am describing here is actually a simpliﬁed
version of a particular type of utilitarianism, but it will sufﬁce to illustrate the
point I want to make.) So, if you ﬁnd yourself in a unique situation, say having to
decide who should get a much needed organ for an organ transplant, and you are a
good utilitarian, you calculate which choice would result in the greatest good for
the greatest number, and that option is the option you ought to take.
Notice the way utilitarianism works: a basic utilitarian principle is used to deduce
what action is morally proper in a particular situation. And this is typical of the way
normative ethical theories work. But, writers such as Ruse and others argue, our
understanding of the evolutionary origins of our ethical inclinations forces us to give
up this conception of normative ethics. Recognizing the evolutionary origins of our
moral sentiments means that we can no longer view our moral sentiments as being
justiﬁed by any ultimate, objective principles. Thus, evolutionary considerations
show us that there are no fundamental normative ethical principles from which to
deduce morally correct actions. In this way, developments in evolutionary theory
have substantial implications for normative ethics – they force us to dramatically
change our basic concept of the role of normative ethics.
Or to put it slightly differently, our understanding of the evolutionary origins of
our moral and ethical sentiments means the end of normative ethics. Or more
precisely, it means the end of normative ethics as that ﬁeld has traditionally been
conceived.

309

310

Recent Developments

In closing, we have looked at just a sample of some of the implications our
understanding of evolution seems to have on basic concepts involving morality
and ethics. It is a small sample, but it should give a sense of some of the substantial
ways in which our understanding of evolution is pushing us to revise our
understanding of morality and ethics.

Empirical Studies
The topics in the two main sections above were largely theoretical. In this section
we focus on empirical studies. The main goal is to give a sense of recent work that
impacts our understanding of the nature and origin of some concepts that are
central to our behavior, such as cooperation, altruism, forgiveness, punishment,
trust, and the like. Another important goal, however, is to show that discussions of
potential implications of evolution need not be purely theoretical – researchers
have brought, and are continuing to bring, empirical data to bear on this topic.
Most of the studies discussed below are recent, and there is much more to be
done. And as is usual, we will explore just a small number of such studies, to get a
ﬂavor of how empirical studies can shed light on issues involving our evolutionary
heritage. We’ll begin with one of the best known of such studies, involving the
iterated prisoner’s dilemma.
The iterated prisoner’s dilemma
As far back as Darwin there have been questions about how cooperative behavior,
and especially altruistic behavior (where one puts oneself at risk in order to beneﬁt
someone else), could arise from an evolutionary process that seems, at bottom, to
be geared toward self-interested, selﬁsh behavior. It is worth brieﬂy noting that
some forms of altruism are not particularly problematic from an evolutionary
perspective. Consider what is termed kin altruism, for example when a bird puts
itself at risk to try to draw a predator away from its offspring in a nearby nest. Such
behavior, which is directly related to the reproductive success of the organism, has
a strong component of self-interest. Likewise for what is termed reciprocal
altruism, which involves situations in which one performing an act beneﬁcial
to another can reasonably expect something comparable in return. This type of
altruism likewise has a strong self-centered component.
But there are well-documented and widespread examples of altruistic behavior
that do not seem explainable in terms of kin or reciprocal altruism, and these have
continued to seem problematic. In the late 1970s a researcher named Robert
Axelrod became interested in the evolution of cooperative and altruistic behavior,
and he began empirical studies to explore the problem, focusing on what is known
as the iterated prisoner’s dilemma.
To understand the iterated prisoner’s dilemma (hereafter I will refer to this as
the iterated PD), it helps to begin with what is now commonly referred to as the
“classical” or “one shot” prisoner’s dilemma. Suppose two agents, A and B, have
the opportunity to interact; that it will be a one-shot interaction in that neither
agent will interact with the other again; that each is acting so as to maximize

30 Reﬂections on Evolution

individual self-interest; and that each, without knowing what the other agent
intends to do, has to decide whether to cooperate or not cooperate in the
interaction. Suppose (a,b) represents the payoff for A and B respectively (so
that, for example, (13, 0) represents that A received 13 points and B received
0 points as a result of the interaction). Suppose the possible payoffs are summa­
rized in the matrix shown in Figure 30.1.
If A is acting to maximize self-interest without regard for B, then A will reason
as follows. I do not know whether B is going to cooperate or not cooperate. If B
cooperates, then if I cooperate I receive 10 and if I do not cooperate I receive 13.
Since 13 is better than 10, in this scenario I am better off not cooperating. On the
other hand, if B does not cooperate, then if I cooperate I’ll receive 0 and if I do not
cooperate I’ll receive 3. Since 3 is better than 0, in this scenario I am also better off
if I do not cooperate. So either way – whether B cooperates or not – my individual
self-interest is better served by not cooperating.
B, of course, will reason in an exactly parallel manner. The result will be that
both A and B, if acting selﬁshly, will not cooperate, leading to the (3,3) payoff.
(Incidentally, notice that the (3,3) payoff is the worst-case outcome from the
perspective of joint interest. It is this feature – that agents acting to maximize
individual self-interest are driven to the mutually worst-case scenario – that
characterizes a prisoner’s dilemma payoff matrix.)
Let’s turn now to the iterated PD. The iterated PD has the same payoff matrix as
the classical PD. However, in the iterated scenario there are more than two agents
(there may well be hundreds or thousands); each agent interacts with each other
agent many times (typically hundreds or thousands of times); and when two
agents interact, each has a record of all their past interactions.
The goal of each agent is the same as in the classical case, that is, the goal is selfinterest in the sense of accumulating the highest number of points by the end of
the interactions. However, unlike the simpler classical prisoner’s dilemma, it is

Figure 30.1 Prisoner’s dilemma payoff matrix.

311

312

Recent Developments

not at all obvious in the iterated PD what the best strategy is. So to get insight into
the best strategies, in the late 1970s Axelrod solicited help from a variety of fellow
researchers and acquaintances. In particular, he asked them each to write a
computer program that would encapsulate what each thought would be the best
strategy for maximizing points in an iterated PD scenario. Axelrod then pitted
these strategies against each other in what was essentially a large, computersimulated iterated PD tournament. It is worth noting that there were no
restrictions on the strategies, and they could be as simple or complex, as
cooperative or uncooperative, as friendly or as devious, as one wished.
The results of the competition were surprising. Most thought the adage “nice
guys ﬁnish last” would apply, and that “friendly,” cooperative programs would
fare poorly against more devious, uncooperative programs. But this is not at all
what happened. Not only did a highly cooperative program win the tournament,
but friendly, cooperative programs overall fared better than noncooperative
ones.
The cooperative program that won the ﬁrst tournament, and continues to do
very well, is named Tit for Tat (TfT). When TfT interacts with another program
for the ﬁrst time, it will always cooperate. In later interactions with that same
program, TfT will do whatever the other program did on the previous interaction.
Note, then, that TfT will always cooperate with a program that last cooperated
with it, and TfT will never be the ﬁrst not to cooperate with another program.
Such programs – those that will never be the ﬁrst not to cooperate with another
program – are referred to as nice programs. In the countless simulations of
iterated PD scenarios run since Axelrod’s original work, cooperative, nice
programs overwhelmingly do better than uncooperative, non-nice programs.
Recall that in an important sense all these programs, nice and non-nice, are at
bottom working to maximize their own self-interest. The goal of each program,
after all, is to win the competition. What Axelrod and others’ research has shown,
however, is that at least in these sorts of scenarios, cooperative, nice behavior is far
better at maximizing self-interest than is uncooperative, non-nice behavior.
Since Axelrod’s work, additional research involving the iterated PD has shed
light on (and continues to shed light on) additional factors important in
promoting one’s self-interest, at least in scenarios such as the iterated PD. For
example, consider the role of retaliation. Note that TfT will always cooperate with
a program that has always cooperated with it. But TfT will retaliate, and
immediately, if another program fails to cooperate with it – on the next
interaction TfT will retaliate by not cooperating with that program.
In iterated PD scenarios, it has become clear that retaliation plays an important
role in successful programs. One illustration of this came in Axelrod’s second
competition, which included over 60 programs (and which TfT again won). In
that competition, 14 of the top 15 ﬁnishers were cooperative, nice programs. The
one exception (which came in eighth) had a strategy similar to that of TfT, except
that this program would at some point not cooperate even with programs that had
always cooperated with it. The program was basically testing to see what it could
get away with. If the other program immediately retaliated, this program went
back to the cooperative Tit for Tat strategy. But if it did not receive immediate
retaliation, then it would increase its frequency of noncooperation, basically

30 Reﬂections on Evolution

exploiting programs that were too nice, that is, ones that hesitated to retaliate
when another program failed to cooperate.
What has also become clear from these studies is the importance of what
researchers term forgiveness. As more simulations were run and analyzed, it
became clear that some programs became locked in a cycle of retaliation. One
strategy that can help break out of such a cycle is to include a sort of “forgiveness”
policy in a program. The idea, roughly, is to try forgiving the other program – by
cooperating even though the other program has been not cooperating – and see
what happens. If the other program goes back to cooperating, the two programs
can then break out of the cycle of retaliation and go back to a mutually beneﬁcial
cycle of cooperation.
The above is just a small sampling of work over roughly the past 50 years
surrounding the iterated PD. From the time of Darwin, there have been various
speculative proposals about how cooperative behavior might have been evolu­
tionarily advantageous. But speculation is one thing, and empirical data is
another. The iterated PD scenario is obviously a simple and artiﬁcial scenario.
But research involving the iterated PD has shed interesting light, and empirically
well-grounded light, not just on cooperative behavior, but on other topics such as
forgiveness, retaliation, and the like. And such research suggests how cooperative
behavior could have arisen out of an evolutionary process that is, at bottom,
geared toward self-interest.
The ultimatum game
In recent years, what is generally termed the ultimatum game has been a widely
used scenario designed to gather additional data about cooperative and altruistic
behavior. In what follows, I provide a brief description of a typical ultimatum
game scenario, and a summary of some of the basic results coming from such
studies.
Suppose you and I are part of a study involving the ultimatum game. The setup
is quite simple. You are provided with a sum of money, let’s say $10. We’ll call you
the “proposer,” as your job is to propose how that $10 is to be split between the
two of us. Your options are to offer me some amount of the $10, from $1 to the
entire $10, in $1 increments. I will be called the “responder,” as my job is to
respond to your proposal by either accepting or rejecting it. If I accept it, we split
the money as you have proposed. If I reject your offer, we each get nothing. The
possible payoff scenarios for the ultimatum game can be summarized in the payoff
matrix shown in Figure 30.2.
It is easy to see what the rational course of action is for two agents who are
acting purely selﬁshly. In every possible payoff scenario, I derive a greater
beneﬁt by accepting your offer than I do by rejecting it. So if I am acting in a
purely self-interested manner, I should accept whatever you propose, no matter
how little. You, on the other hand, know that the self-interested and rational
thing for me to do is to accept your offer no matter how low, and so if you are
acting selﬁshly and believe I will act selﬁshly also, you should make the
minimum offer allowed, that is, $1, since this is the scenario where you derive
the greatest beneﬁt.

313

314

Recent Developments

Figure 30.2 Ultimatum game payoff matrix.

But given the setup, if you make what I consider too low an offer, I have the
option of punishing you by rejecting the offer and therefore depriving you of any
money. But importantly, I can punish you only by sacriﬁcing something of beneﬁt
for myself, that is, I can punish you only by depriving myself of any payoff.
In these studies interactions are generally done anonymously, that is, if you and
I are interacting we do not do so face to face, nor do you know who I am or vice
versa. An important consequence of this setup is that if I punish you, I cannot do
so with any expectation that it will beneﬁt me. I might expect that punishing you
might beneﬁt others, since my punishing you might make you more likely to give
higher offers when you interact with others in the study. But I cannot expect it to
beneﬁt me. In short, in this scenario my punishing you would be a form of
altruistic behavior, as it can at best beneﬁt others but only at a cost to myself. It is a
modest form of altruistic behavior, not as grand as risking one’s life to pull a
drowning child from a raging river, but it is a form of altruistic behavior
nonetheless.
In such studies, selﬁsh behavior is never the common outcome. The studies
reveal that there is always a percentage of subjects (it tends to reliably be around
25%) who do act selﬁshly, but they are always a minority. The most common offer
from proposers is roughly 50%, that is, most proposers offer to split the money
more or less evenly. And it is not at all uncommon to see proposers offering more
than 50%.
Also, altruistic behavior in the form of punishing proposers who are seen as
making too low an offer is standard behavior. In fact, offers below about 30% are
routinely rejected.
Studies involving the ultimatum game have been conducted on a vast array of
subjects. Subjects studied in the ultimatum game not only include college
students from across the world (college students are by far the most common
subjects for a wide variety of studies), but also include a wide range of cultures,
such as members of small whale-hunting societies in the East Indonesian islands,
hunting societies of Tanzania, nomadic tribes, indigenous cultures of southern
Chile and Argentina, and many others.
The results of these studies are robust – no matter what country or what type of
culture, one rarely observes the outcomes predicted by the view that agents act
primarily in a selﬁsh manner. And altruistic behavior, in the form of punishing
proposers with offers considered too low, is standard behavior across cultures and
across the world.

30 Reﬂections on Evolution

The fact that behavior of this sort is found across cultures and around the world
suggests that the behavior is not simply the result of one’s cultural heritage.
Rather, behavior that is this consistent across cultures suggests that the behavior
is stemming from more deeply ingrained tendencies. And tendencies that are
deeply ingrained in this way are almost certainly a result of our evolutionary past.
The results of the ultimatum game suggest a variety of additional questions. For
example, can we do studies that will shed light on why the sort of altruistic
punishment found in the ultimatum game might have been, and might continue
to be, evolutionarily advantageous? Can we gather data that will tell us something
about the conditions under which such behavior would be advantageous, and
conditions under which it would not be? And if we can identify conditions under
which such behavior would be evolutionarily advantageous, are those conditions
likely to have been present in the evolutionary past of humans? The design of the
ultimatum game is too simple to shed light on these sorts of questions. But below
we will turn to other studies that do provide data relevant to such questions.
Additional notes on cooperation and altruism
Studies such as the ultimatum game show that, while cooperative behavior is the
norm, nonetheless a percentage of subjects will tend to act selﬁshly. Additional
studies, involving more complex scenarios, have probed whether this selﬁsh
behavior can be modiﬁed by the behavior of others. The answer is yes, and it turns
out that a type of altruistic behavior plays an important role.
In a typical such study, groups of four or more are involved in the interactions,
and the more the agents cooperate, the more the group as a whole beneﬁts. If the
agents cooperate equally, they split the rewards equally. However, if a particular
agent acts selﬁshly while the rest of the group acts cooperatively, that agent
receives a higher share of the beneﬁts than do the cooperating agents. Finally,
such studies are typically set up so that an agent can punish another agent who is
acting selﬁshly, but only in such a way that is substantially detrimental to the one
doing the punishing.
As with other studies, cooperative behavior is the most common. But again we
ﬁnd a consistent minority of agents who act selﬁshly. What typically happens in a
group with a selﬁsh agent is that one of the other agents then engages in punishing
behavior, and this usually results in the selﬁsh agent ceasing to act selﬁshly. As a
result of a return to complete cooperative behavior, the overall beneﬁt to the
group as a whole increases. It should be noted, however, that this comes at a cost
to the one doing the punishing – that agent would have individually been better
off not engaging in the punishing behavior.
This punishing behavior is a form of altruistic behavior, in that it beneﬁts the
group while being detrimental to the individual engaging in it. It is clear that in
some scenarios, strategies where some agents act altruistically is of overall beneﬁt
to the group. However, this sort of altruistic behavior will not necessarily be an
evolutionarily stable strategy. That is, one can show (this is generally done
through computer modeling) that in some contexts, agents acting altruistically
in these sorts of ways will not be reproductively successful enough to ensure that
the altruistic tendencies remain in the population. Importantly, however, in other

315

316

Recent Developments

contexts such altruistic tendencies have been shown to be an evolutionarily stable
strategy.
Additional studies have investigated the conditions under which these sorts of
cooperative and altruistic behaviors are and are not successful. Such studies
suggest that the conditions under which these behaviors would be successful are
the sorts of conditions that were likely present when modern humans ﬁrst
appeared. (The ﬁrst humans – a now-extinct species – appeared about 2 million
years ago. Our current best evidence indicates that modern humans – our species
– appeared about 200,000–300,000 years ago.) Such conditions include small
group size (early humans were almost certainly members of relatively small
communities), conditions in which migration in and out of the group is relatively
low (again a likely condition for early humans), and conditions where there is
likely to be substantial competition with other groups (it is far less clear what the
level of competition and conﬂict would have been among groups of early humans,
but it would not be surprising if such competition and conﬂict was common). In
short, there is reason to think that the conditions under which these sorts of
altruistic behaviors can be successful were conditions that were likely present
when modern humans ﬁrst appeared.
Again, these results are preliminary. But as mentioned earlier, results such as
these nicely illustrate some of the ways issues central to human behavior –
cooperation, altruism, forgiveness, punishment, trust (more on this below), and
the like – can be studied empirically, and such studies can shed light on the likely
evolutionary advantages and origins of such behavior.
The trust game
Before closing this section, I want to provide a brief overview of one additional line
of study. This line of study also involves human interactions, but my main interest
here is to show how research related to evolutionary inﬂuences, such as those
discussed above, can take place at quite different levels, including the biochemical
level.
Trust is a fundamental element of a wide range of human interactions. For
example, you and I will behave in entirely different ways toward each other
depending on the level of trust between us, including whether we share resources
such as food and other goods, whether we are willing to help the other
in situations of risk, and much more. If we trust each other, we will behave
one way toward each other; if we do not trust each other, we will behave quite
differently.
Recently, researchers have begun studying some of the biochemical inﬂuences
on trusting behavior. Consider the following study involving what the authors’ call
the trust game. Suppose you and I are playing this game. At the start of the game,
we are both given $12. Let’s call my role the role of the “giver,” and your role the
role of the “sharer.” My role is to give you some portion (maybe none) of my
money. Let’s suppose my options are to give you $0, $4, $8, or $12 of my money.
Whichever of these amounts I give you, the people conducting the experiment
will give you an additional amount equal to twice what I gave. For example, if I
give you $4 of my money, the experimenters additionally give you double that,

30 Reﬂections on Evolution

that is, they give you an additional $8. So you now have your original $12, plus $4
of my money, plus an additional $8 provided by the experimenters, giving you a
total of $24. If I give you my entire $12, the experimenters double it and give you
an additional $24, which, added to your original $12, gives you $48 in total.
So depending on whether I give you $0, $4, $8, or $12 of my money, you will end
up with a total pool of $12, $24, $36, or $48. At this point it is entirely up to you as
to how, if at all, to share your pool with me. You can give me any amount from $0
to the entire pool of money you have. Unlike the ultimatum game – and this is an
important element – I do not have the option of rejecting your offer. Once I have
initially given you some portion of my money, I have no more inﬂuence on how
things proceed – how much money of the total pool we each get is entirely up to
you.
The payoff scenario for this game can be summarized in the payoff matrix
shown in Figure 30.3. Here, there is one large box for each of the four amounts of
my money I might turn over to you, and in each large box is a summary of the
possible payoffs for each of those options.
This is a trickier game. If I am purely self-interested and think you are as well, I
will give you none of my money. The reason is straightforward: if I believe you will
act in a purely self-interested way, then I will believe you will keep any money I
give you. So I am better off giving you nothing and keeping my money for myself.
On the other hand, if I have trust that you will not behave in a purely selfinterested way, then I will give you some of my money, trusting that you will share
with me some of the additional proceeds gotten from the people conducting the
study. In short, the results of this game depend a good deal on whether people act
in self-interested or in cooperative ways, how people believe others will act and,
importantly, on how much trust the giver has and thus how much (if any) money
the giver hopes will be shared with him or her.
Given the results of the experiments discussed in the sections above, it may not
be surprising to learn that givers rarely acted in an untrusting manner by giving no
money to the sharers, and likewise very few of the sharers acted in a purely selﬁsh
manner by not returning any (or even only a very small amount of) money. These

Figure 30.3 Trust game payoff matrix.

317

318

Recent Developments

results alone provide additional data about our behavior, not unlike the data
discussed earlier.
But in this study, the experimenters were mainly interested in factors involved
in the biological basis of trust. Studies with nonhuman subjects had suggested that
oxytocin affects social behavior (oxytocin is a widely studied molecule, found in all
mammals, that can act both as a neurotransmitter and a hormone). The idea was
to see if oxytocin would inﬂuence the level of trust among players of the trust
game. (By the way, oxytocin is not to be confused with oxycodone and its opioid
relatives, the addictive pain killers that have been much in the news recently.)
The results were striking. Oxytocin substantially increased trust. Before
participating in the game, about half the givers were given oxytocin, and the
other givers were given a placebo. The level of trust among those receiving
oxytocin skyrocketed, as reﬂected in a dramatic increase in the amount of money
these subjects were willing to give over to the other member of the pair. The
researchers were careful to check whether the effects could be attributed to
factors other than oxytocin’s effect on one’s level of trust, and they could not be –
the studies strongly indicate that the results above are due entirely or almost
entirely to oxytocin’s inﬂuence on the subjects’ level of trust.
In closing, the empirical studies outlined above are but a small sample of similar
studies. These studies show how concepts tied to our most basic behavior –
including cooperation, altruism, forgiveness, punishment, trust, and the like – can
be studied empirically, and studied at a variety of levels. At present these studies
are preliminary, but as the years go on it is likely that more and more empirical
work will shed increasing light on evolutionarily based factors underlying much of
our behavior.

Concluding Remarks
In earlier chapters we saw how the discoveries of the 1600s required our
predecessors to rethink core beliefs that had long been taken as established
empirical facts. But the challenges to our core beliefs from more recent discov­
eries are, to my mind at least, substantially more dramatic. In the preceding
chapters we looked at discoveries such as relativity and quantum theory, and in
the past two chapters we have been focusing on evolutionary theory. Sufﬁce it to
say that evolution, as with relativity and quantum theory, forces us to substantially
rethink basic views we have held for a long, long time. It seems clear that we can
never return to our earlier views. Although it is still too early to discern just what
sorts of new views will arise, it seems clear that, as were our predecessors in the
early 1600s, we are at a point where we can see that major changes in our overall
worldview are required.
Before closing, let me make one ﬁnal observation related to evolution. There
seems to be a common feeling that the evolutionary account forces on us some
sort of dismal, less interesting view of the universe and especially of our place in it.
But the evolutionary account need not be taken in any sort of negative light.
Evolution forces us to view our place in the big scheme of things in a very different
way. But not, I think, in a worse way.

30 Reﬂections on Evolution

To take one example, and admittedly speaking personally, I like the idea that we
are but one of an estimated 10 million species currently on Earth, and I like that
we are related to every single plant and animal currently alive as well as all those
who have gone extinct before us. I have had the good fortune to live in a variety of
places around the world, and the good fortune of being able to visit even more,
and I like it that wherever I go, the new ﬂora and fauna I see are all part of a large
family. It is an amazing idea: every organism on Earth, every plant and every
animal, is our relative. I cannot see why anyone would want to view this in a
negative way.
Darwin, too, seemed to feel the same way. Darwin ended his unpublished 1844
summary of his views, and the 1859 Origin of Species, with this oft-quoted and
beautifully phrased passage:
There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers, having
originally been breathed into a few forms or into one; and that, whilst
this planet has gone cycling on according to the ﬁxed law of gravity, from so
simple a beginning forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been,
and are being, evolved. (Darwin 1964, p. 490)
The changes required by our discoveries about evolution are substantial. But as
Darwin notes, there is grandeur in this view of life.

319

320

31
Worldviews: Concluding Thoughts
So, where are we? In this ﬁnal chapter we take a broad look at what we have
discussed so far, consider some implications of the discoveries explored in the
previous chapters, and speculate on some of the changes that will likely be
required of our worldview.

Overview
Early in the text, we explored the Aristotelian worldview. Again, this worldview
was a jigsaw puzzle-like, interlocking system of beliefs. The pieces ﬁt together
well. The universe made sense. Within that jigsaw puzzle, we had a sense of having
a good understanding of all the important questions – the structure of the
universe, our place in the universe, how and why things behaved as they did, and
so on.
Not only did we have answers to individual questions about the world, but we
also had a sense of what the universe was like, that is, of what sort of universe we
inhabited. The universe was teleological and essentialistic, a purposeful universe
full of objects working toward essential, inherent, natural goals. The picture
seemed so complete, and so clearly correct, that we ﬁnd Aristotle himself
suggesting that the understanding of the world was pretty much complete. All
that remained was to ﬁll in some small gaps, to cross some ts and dot some is. In
doing so, Aristotle was voicing an opinion that would be repeated in every time
period, up to and including the present.
Within the Aristotelian worldview, the usual metaphor, that is, the usual way of
thinking broadly about the sort of universe we inhabited, was to think of the
universe as being like an organism. In something like the way an organism has
parts that function so as to accomplish goals – the heart has the function of
pumping blood, the digestive system of processing food, and so on – so also the
universe is conceived of as having parts with natural functions and goals. We
understood – or thought we understood – what kind of universe we inhabited.
In Chapters 9 through 22, we explored the transition from the Aristotelian
worldview into the Newtonian worldview. As we saw, the jigsaw puzzle of beliefs
that formed the Aristotelian worldview could not continue in light of the new
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

31 Worldviews: Concluding Thoughts

discoveries of the 1600s. Some of the mistaken beliefs in this worldview, such as
the perfect circle and uniform motion facts, had looked like reasonably straight­
forward empirical facts but turned out to be mistaken, philosophical/conceptual
facts. Other beliefs within this worldview, such as the belief that the Earth was the
center of the universe, were well supported with empirical observations and solid
reasoning, but turned out to be mistaken nonetheless.
We saw that it was not simply that individual, peripheral pieces of the
Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle had to be abandoned. Rather, core pieces of the puzzle
had to be abandoned, and with those core pieces went the entire jigsaw puzzle.
Notably, the Aristotelian worldview turned out to be wrong in a broad sort of way.
In other words, it was not merely that individual beliefs of the Aristotelian jigsaw
puzzle turned out to be wrong; rather, the Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle turned out to
be the wrong sort of jigsaw puzzle. The universe turned out not to be at all like the
way it was conceived of on the Aristotelian worldview. The universe was not like
an organism after all.
As we saw, the Aristotelian jigsaw puzzle was replaced with a new jigsaw puzzle,
one compatible with the new discoveries. The new jigsaw puzzle, the Newtonian
worldview, seemed to work well. The pieces ﬁt together well. The universe made
sense. Once again we had answers to what we took to be the major individual
questions – the structure of the universe, how things behave, and so on.
And once again, not only did we have answers to individual questions about the
universe, but we also had a good sense of the sort of universe we live in. We lived
in a mechanistic universe, one in which objects behave as they do largely because
of external forces acting on those objects. And we could understand these forces,
and characterize them with precise, mathematical laws.
And once again we had a good metaphor to sum up the sort of universe we
inhabited. The universe, we came to believe, is like a machine. The universe, we
thought, consists of objects that interact as the parts of a machine interact. As
parts of machines interact by pushing and pulling against other parts, so too we
viewed objects in the universe as interacting in this sort of mechanical, mecha­
nistic way. And implicit in this machine-like view was the notion that interactions
are local interactions, with one object inﬂuencing only objects with which it has
some sort of connection. The parts worked together in ways we thought we
understood, and, like Aristotle, we thought we were close to a complete under­
standing of the world.
And we had a general sense of our place in the grand scheme of things. We were
no longer located at the physical center of the universe, but in another sense we
were, we thought, still the center of creation. Life, the general view went, was the
product of a divine inﬂuence. How else could the apparent design found in living
organisms be explained? And along with this view, it was natural to view humans
as the apex of life, as special.
All this worked well for quite some time. But as a result of more recent
discoveries, we see that relativity theory and quantum theory have nontrivial
implications regarding the sort of universe we live in, and evolutionary theory has
equally substantial implications for our views of ourselves and our place in the
universe. Do these new discoveries require changes merely in some of the
peripheral beliefs of the older, Newtonian jigsaw puzzle? Or, as was the case

321

322

Recent Developments

with the new discoveries in the 1600s, are we being forced to abandon core pieces
of that jigsaw puzzle? Let’s explore these questions next.

Reﬂections on Relativity Theory
At ﬁrst glance, the implications of relativity theory seem quite substantial. The
implications of relativity – for example, that space and time can differ for different
observers – run counter to strong intuitions we have about the nature of space
and time. Again, we tend to believe, usually strongly, that space and time are
absolute, that, roughly, space and time are the same for everyone everywhere.
These views on space and time – that is, that space and time are absolute – can
be found explicitly stated in Newton’s Principia. But in fact they go back long
before Newton. The belief that space and time are absolute is a belief that is
implicitly found at least as far back as the ancient Greeks. In short, absolute space
and time have been around, at least implicitly, for a long time, and they are
explicitly found within the Newtonian framework.
But suppose we consider the question of whether, within the Newtonian jigsaw
puzzle, absolute space and absolute time are more like core beliefs or more like
peripheral beliefs. There is little question that Newton himself, and most of us as
well, tend to have strong beliefs in absolute space and time. But recall our
discussion from Chapter 1, that the distinction between core and peripheral
beliefs is not a matter of the depth of conviction in the beliefs. Rather, the
distinction hinges on whether the belief, the piece of the jigsaw puzzle, can be
replaced without substantially altering the overall jigsaw puzzle.
Viewed this way, the beliefs in absolute space and absolute time, although
strongly held, are not core beliefs. Within the Newtonian framework, these
beliefs can be replaced without substantially altering the overall Newtonian
jigsaw puzzle. Replacing these beliefs does require changing some other
beliefs, of course. But replacing the belief in absolute space and time with
a belief in relativistic space and time does not require replacing the overall
mechanistic, Newtonian view described above. One can still view the universe
as consisting of objects that interact with one another in a mechanistic way,
and a way describable by precise laws. What must change is our understanding
of issues such as the location and timing of events, but otherwise, the overall
Newtonian jigsaw puzzle can remain more or less intact. In short, although it
is surprising – quite surprising, I think – to discover that space and time are
not absolute, such facts are compatible with the overall mechanistic, Newto­
nian jigsaw puzzle.
A similar story goes for implications such as the curvature of spacetime, as well
as relativity’s quite different account (that is, different from the account usually
associated with the Newtonian worldview) of gravity. It is surprising to ﬁnd out
that spacetime itself can be inﬂuenced and curved by the presence of matter. And
it is likewise surprising to discover that the account of gravity most of us have
taken for granted, that is, a realistic notion of gravity as an attractive force, can at
best be maintained with an instrumentalist attitude in light of the relativistic
account of gravity.

31 Worldviews: Concluding Thoughts

But these implications also, although quite surprising, do not require rejecting
the core pieces of the Newtonian jigsaw puzzle. That is, we can accept the
curvature of spacetime and the relativistic account of gravity without drastically
changing the overall mechanistic, Newtonian jigsaw puzzle.
This is not to say that relativity theory has no substantial implications. Even if
the implications discussed above do not require rejecting core pieces of the
overall Newtonian jigsaw puzzle, neither are they completely trivial implica­
tions (they are not, for example, purely peripheral in the sense that ice cream
preferences are peripheral). But putting aside for the moment the issue of what
particular beliefs relativity theory forces us to change, the more important
implication of relativity theory, the real moral, I think, is that it dramatically
shows how wrong we can be about issues that seem so obvious. Or in other
words, how easy it can be for philosophical/conceptual facts to masquerade as
obvious empirical facts. For example, everyone I know, before being introduced
to relativity theory, took it as an obvious empirical fact that space and time are
the same for everyone. Everyone just knew – it was just obvious – that time
doesn’t pass at different rates, that people do not miraculously age more slowly,
just because someone or something happens to be moving. And everyone just
knew that space doesn’t shrink, like some balloon left out in the cold, just
because someone or something is moving. These seemed like such obvious,
empirical facts. But not only do these turn out not to be obvious, they turn out
to be wrong.
Consider again our predecessors’ beliefs in the perfect circle and uniform
motion facts, and compare those beliefs with our beliefs in absolute space and
time. Our predecessors took it as an obvious empirical fact – everyone just knew,
it was just obvious to anyone with even the smallest bit of common sense – that
heavenly bodies move in perfect circles with uniform speed. These seemed like
obvious empirical facts. From our perspective, from within a quite different
worldview, it seems odd that anyone could have been so committed to beliefs such
as the perfect circle and uniform motion facts. Most people react, when ﬁrst
learning about the perfect circle and uniform motion facts, with sentiments along
the lines of “Why would anyone ever have believed that?”
But now think about our descendants. At some point they will look back at our
beliefs in the same way. Our grandchildren and great grandchildren will look back
at us and wonder why we would ever have believed something as odd as that space
and time were the same for everyone.
In short, our mistaking absolute space and time for empirical facts is much like
our predecessors’ mistaking uniform motion and perfectly circular motion for
empirical facts. In both cases, what appeared to be obvious empirical facts turned
out to be mistaken, philosophical/conceptual facts. And this, I think, is the most
important implication of relativity theory. It vividly illustrates how a belief that
seems so commonsensical, so obviously correct, can turn out to be so wrong. And
this should make us a bit more cautious about how sure we are of other facts that
seem to us to be obvious, undeniable facts. So it is not so much that relativity
theory forces us to change major aspects of our worldview; rather, relativity theory
should lead us to rethink the degree of conﬁdence we have in our picture of the
world.

323

324

Recent Developments

Reﬂections on Quantum Theory
In contrast to relativity theory, the implications of new discoveries involving
quantum theory, especially Bell’s theorem and the Aspect experiments, are likely
to require substantial changes in the general Newtonian picture. Again, on the
Newtonian worldview, the universe is viewed as proceeding as a machine-like
series of events. Central to our concept of a machine is a sort of push–pull type of
interaction of parts. Gears push against other gears, pulleys move other pulleys
but always through some sort of connection such as belts, and, generally, one part
of a machine inﬂuences only those parts with which it has some sort of contact.
And likewise for the universe. We were convinced we live in a universe with the
same sort of push–pull interactions. Objects and events inﬂuence other objects
and events in the same sort of machine-like way, and interactions are local
interactions, with inﬂuence only among objects and events that have some sort of
connection between them.
But it seems that just this core feature of the Newtonian view of the universe
cannot be maintained in light of the discovery of the new quantum facts revealed
by the Aspect experiments. We may not understand how it is possible, but we live
in a universe that allows for instantaneous, nonlocal inﬂuences between events,
even events separated by substantial distances and for which there is apparently
no possibility of any sort of communication or connection between them. No one
knows how the universe can be like this, only that the universe is like this.
For the sake of having a convenient term, I will refer to the sort of instantaneous
inﬂuences between distant events, of the sort demonstrated by the Aspect
experiments, as Bell-like inﬂuences. It is worth noting that the Bell-like inﬂuences
demonstrated thus far – for example, those demonstrated in the Aspect and
similar experiments – have involved what we might consider micro-level entities,
rather than the sort of ordinary objects that get more of our attention in a typical
day. That is, although instantaneous inﬂuences have been well established for
entities such as photons, electrons, and the like, thus far no such experiments have
shown Bell-like inﬂuences between ordinary-sized objects such as tables, trees,
rocks, and the like. Is it possible, then, that the instantaneous, nonmechanistic
inﬂuences might be conﬁned to micro-level entities? If so, might we be able to
retain our views that macro-level objects behave in a Newtonian, mechanistic
way, even though we have to abandon our views that micro-level entities behave
in this way?
It is too early to give a deﬁnitive answer to this question. My sense, though, is
that the answer will be “no.” Since the original Aspect experiments, physicists
have successfully demonstrated Bell-like inﬂuences between ever larger entities
and over ever larger distances. For example, such inﬂuences have been demon­
strated between two separated, roughly golf-ball-sized collections of atoms. And
in other experiments, such inﬂuences have been demonstrated for objects
separated by over 100 miles rather than merely the distance across a lab
room. As I write this, a proposed Bell-like experiment is being evaluated that
would involve the International Space Station (ISS), where one detector would be
in a lab on the earth and the other detector on the ISS. In short, Bell-like
experiments, involving variations in distance, entangled objects, and more are all

31 Worldviews: Concluding Thoughts

over the place, and they keep coming back reafﬁrming Bell-like inﬂuences. The
fact that such inﬂuences are being demonstrated for more and more, and larger,
and more separated entities is one of the reasons for thinking that we will not be
able to conﬁne nonmechanistic, Bell-like inﬂuences to only the micro level.
Another reason comes from looking at past history. One lesson from history
is that we should not underestimate the ingenuity of scientists to ﬁnd new and
novel ways to exploit new discoveries. In the past, fundamental new discoveries
have led to changes – including theoretical, technological, and conceptual
changes – that could not even be imagined when the discoveries were ﬁrst
made. The discovery that we live in a universe that, deep down, allows for Belllike inﬂuences strikes me as just such a fundamental, important new discovery.
It is the sort of discovery that is likely to snowball. Right now the snowball is still
fairly small, but I suspect it will become ever larger, leading to changes – again
theoretical, technological, and conceptual changes – that we can barely discern
the outlines of at the moment.
If I am right about this, then we are living in a period that is in many ways like
that of the early 1600s. At that time new discoveries, such as those involving
Galileo and the telescope, eventually led to an entirely new way of thinking about
the sort of universe we live in. Today, at the very least, the discovery of Bell-like
inﬂuences forces us to give up the Newtonian view that the universe is entirely a
mechanistic universe. And I suspect this is only the tip of the iceberg, and that this
discovery, like those in the 1600s, will lead to a quite different view of the sort of
universe in which we live.

Reﬂections on Evolutionary Theory
Whereas relativity theory and quantum theory have implications for the sort of
universe in which we live, evolutionary theory mainly has implications for our
place in that universe. If we are to accept the empirical evidence for what it is –
and I think we must – then discoveries in evolutionary theory require us to give up
the long-held view that humans are special. We have to accept that we are the
result of a natural, not supernatural, process, and that rather than being the apex
of life, we are instead one type of organism among roughly 10 million currently
existing species all, from an evolutionary perspective, on an equal footing.
As our predecessors in the 1600s dealt with the discovery that we were no
longer the physical center of the universe, so too we will have to deal with the
discovery that we are not in any way the center of the universe. This realization
requires, among other things, a rethinking of religious views. But this is not the
ﬁrst time empirical discoveries have forced such a rethinking. In Chapter 20 we
discussed how the Newtonian account of the motion of heavenly bodies removed
the need for a supernatural explanation of such motion. This in turn required a
rethinking of the earlier conceptions of the role of a divine being (in particular, the
role in explaining the motion of heavenly bodies). But as noted in that chapter,
religious beliefs tend to be well entrenched. The discoveries in the 1600s forced a
rethinking of the conception of God, but those discoveries certainly did not lead
to an abandonment of religious belief. And I suspect the same will be true in

325

326

Recent Developments

upcoming years. An increasing appreciation of the implications of evolution will, I
hope, at least lead to a substantial rethinking of traditional religious beliefs, but as
in the 1600s, I suspect this is unlikely to lead to a complete abandonment of such
beliefs.
Likewise for some of our basic ethical concepts. As discussed in the previous
chapter, it is likely that as we better understand the evolutionary origins of our
ethical tendencies, this understanding will lead to a rethinking of key ethical
concepts. In short, our understanding of our evolutionary origins requires us to
rethink our place in the universe, and almost certainly will require we rethink
traditional views on religion and ethics. It is too early to predict how exactly such
changes will play out, but just as changes came in the 1600s, so such changes are
almost surely forthcoming. As I’ve mentioned at several points, we live in exciting
times.
But there is no reason a new outlook need be a gloomy one. As Darwin put it,
and as I tried to express in Chapter 30, there is grandeur in this view of life. Our
predecessors worked out respectable new philosophical and conceptual views
compatible with the empirical discoveries of their time, and I suspect we will as
well.

Metaphors
I will close with a ﬁnal observation, one that I ﬁnd rather interesting. As noted
above, worldviews have tended to be accompanied by a prevailing metaphor or
analogy. Again, within the Aristotelian worldview, the universe was viewed as like
an organism, with parts functioning together to achieve natural goals and
purposes. Within the Newtonian worldview, the universe was viewed as like a
machine, with parts pushing and pulling and interacting with other parts, much
like the way the parts of a machine interact.
It is easy to understand the appeal and usefulness of such metaphors, in that
they provide a convenient and simple way of summarizing the overall view of
what the universe is like. But one intriguing feature of recent discoveries is
this: the universe they suggest is not like anything we have ever experienced.
That is, the nonlocal inﬂuences demonstrated by the Aspect experiments
suggest a universe that is not like anything with which we are familiar. A
universe that allows for instantaneous inﬂuences between events that have no
connection whatsoever between them is not a universe that is like anything
familiar to us.
Notably, because of this, the universe suggested by recent developments may
be a universe that does not lend itself to being summarized by any convenient
metaphor. We may live in a universe that is like – well, that is not like anything
with which we are familiar. For the ﬁrst time in (at least recorded) history, we
may be metaphorless. And we may have reached the point where we will never
again be able to summarize the world we inhabit by appealing to a convenient
metaphor.
Nonetheless, even though the emerging view may not lend itself to being
summarized by a convenient metaphor, some general view of the universe will

31 Worldviews: Concluding Thoughts

probably emerge. And although it is difﬁcult to predict what exactly this view will
be, it seems likely that our children and grandchildren will develop a view of the
universe that is substantially different from our own. This view will likely be
shaped not only by the discoveries we discussed in the ﬁnal part of this book, but
also by developments occurring now and in the near future. Again, we live in
interesting times. Stay tuned.

327

329

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading
Before turning to notes and suggested reading for the individual chapters in this
book, I’ll ﬁrst make a few general suggestions regarding additional readings and
sources. The materials mentioned here are primarily suggested with an eye
toward works that would be good starting points for further investigating topics
you might ﬁnd of interest.

History of Science
With respect to general histories of science, Mason’s A History of the Sciences is a
good single-volume source. Mason provides an overview of the sciences from the
ancient Babylonians and Egyptians through the twentieth century, and although it
is a single-volume work, Mason’s book contains a surprising amount of detail.
Lindberg’s The Beginnings of Western Science: The European Scientiﬁc Tradition
in Philosophical, Religious, and Institutional Context, 600 B.C. to A.D. 1450
provides a more detailed account of ancient and medieval science, while Kuhn’s
The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy in the Development of Western
Thought is a classic work exploring the changes in the 1500s and 1600s. Cohen’s
The Birth of a New Physics is a somewhat more general, and quite accessible,
account of these changes. For more recent developments, Kragh’s Quantum
Generations: A History of Physics in the Twentieth Century is an excellent and
thorough history of physics from the late 1800s to the present day. Pyenson’s and
Sheets-Pyenson’s Servants of Nature: A History of Scientiﬁc Institutions, Enter­
prises, and Sensibilities provides a history of somewhat different, but important,
aspects of the scientiﬁc enterprise.

Women in the History of Science
You may have noticed that, aside from a brief mention of Marie Curie in
Chapter 22, there is almost no mention of the role of women in the present
book. It is certainly not the case that women played no role in the history of
science. But there is little question that, during most of our history, society’s
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

330

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

attitudes discouraged women from playing prominent roles in the sciences
focused on in this book, especially physics and astronomy. But again, this is
not to say that women played no important roles in these sciences. To take just
one example, the astronomical work that began in the 1600s required copious
amounts of careful (not to mention tedious) observation and mathematical
calculation, and much of the observations and calculations were performed by
women. For example, Sophia Brahe, Tycho Brahe’s younger sister, provided
important assistance in his observations. The role of women in the history and
philosophy of science is another general area of interest you might want to
explore. If so, I would recommend Margaret Alic’s Hypatia’s Heritage: A History
of Women in Science from Antiquity Through the Nineteenth Century as a good
starting point. Also, biographies of many women in science, and links to other
similar sources, can be found at http://www.eiu.edu/wism/about_biographies.
php.

Philosophical Issues in Physics and Astronomy
For those interested in further exploring issues along the lines of those discussed
in this book, especially historical examples and issues involving astronomy and
physics, Cushing’s Philosophical Concepts in Physics: The Historical Relation
Between Philosophy and Scientiﬁc Theories is a good starting point. Cushing
(1937–2002) was a physicist, albeit one with a long-held interest in philosophical
issues. His book provides a detailed look at numerous discoveries in physics, with
an eye toward illuminating the philosophical issues involved in those discoveries.
Kosso’s Appearance and Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Physics is
another interesting and accessible exploration of philosophical issues in physics.
Likewise, Lange’s An Introduction to the Philosophy of Physics: Locality, Fields,
Energy, and Mass is an accessible, but more detailed, exploration of some key
philosophical questions arising in the context of modern physics. For those
interested in further exploring issues related to astronomy, a book mentioned
earlier, Kuhn’s The Copernican Revolution, is a good starting point.

Areas Other than Physics and Astronomy
Although the historical examples in the present text (with the exception of the
discussion in Chapter 29 of the historical development of evolutionary theory),
and most of those in the texts mentioned above, primarily involve physics and
astronomy, these ﬁelds are of course not the whole of science. Nor, of course, does
philosophy of science involve only these ﬁelds. An interesting general introduc­
tion to the philosophy of science, but one focusing on biology (speciﬁcally
immunology) rather than astronomy and physics, is Klee’s Introduction to the
Philosophy of Science. Hull’s and Ruse’s The Philosophy of Biology is a good
anthology, organized by central topics in the philosophy of biology, and would
provide a good starting point for investigating issues in the philosophy of biology.
Likewise, Part IV of Brody and Grandy’s Readings in the Philosophy of Science

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

provides a range of introductory readings in the philosophy of biology. And for
philosophical issues more closely tied to evolutionary theory, Ruse’s Taking
Darwin Seriously is a good starting point.
The history and philosophy of chemistry has, in recent years, become a wellestablished area under the broader umbrella of the history and philosophy of
science. The main journal in this area is HYLE: International Journal for
Philosophy of Chemistry, and this journal is probably the best starting point
for getting a sense of the topics investigated within this area. The journal can be
found online at www.hyle.org.
Another area that has become well established in recent decades involves
feminist issues in the philosophy of science. Feminist approaches to the philoso­
phy of science cover a broad area, including (but not limited to) general
methodological and epistemological issues, as well as more speciﬁc issues
involving particular disciplines (for example, such as are found in writings
concerning feminist archaeology). Section 5 of Klee’s Scientiﬁc Inquiry: Readings
in the Philosophy of Science provides introductory readings involving feminist
issues in the philosophy of science. Harding’s The Science Question in Feminism
would provide another good starting point. The issues discussed by Harding
range from some that are not at all contentious, to others that are highly
contentious. Given this, her book would provide a good idea of the range of
issues involved in feminist approaches to science and the philosophy of science.

Miscellaneous Works
An excellent online resource is the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (SEP),
available at https://plato.stanford.edu. The SEP contains articles on a wide variety
of topics in philosophy, including numerous topics in the history and philosophy
of science. Articles in the SEP generally contain extensive bibliographies, which
provide additional sources for further investigating topics of interest.
Gale’s Theory of Science: An Introduction to the History, Logic, and Philosophy
of Science is a good general introduction to the philosophy of science, making
good use of many examples from the history of science. And another good
introductory book, also drawing heavily on historical examples, is Losse’s A
Historical Introduction to the Philosophy of Science. A book I’ve always rather
liked, though one somewhat broader in scope and somewhat difﬁcult to classify, is
Pine’s Science and the Human Prospect. This book is unfortunately now out of
print, but an online version is available at www2.hawaii.edu/∼pine/book1-2.html.
Gingerich’s The Eye of Heaven: Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler provides good
examples of much more speciﬁc and detailed studies in the history and philoso­
phy of science. Lindberg’s Science in the Middle Ages and Clagett’s Critical
Problems in the History of Science likewise provide collections of papers that deal
with much more speciﬁc issues, while at the same time remaining accessible to
nonspecialists.
With these general recommendations in place, I’ll move on to more speciﬁc
notes and suggestions for further reading for the individual chapters.

331

332

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

Part I: Fundamental Issues
In terms of the general issues covered in Part I, most of these issues are discussed
in a number of introductory books and anthologies (such anthologies generally
consist of collections of papers, usually by philosophers of science, organized by
theme and typically preceded by introductory comments by the editors). Intro­
ductory books include Klee (1997), Gale (1979), and Losse (1972), and anthologies
include such works as Brody and Grandy (1971), Curd and Cover (1998), Klee
(1997), and Klemke, Hollinger, and Kline (1988).

Chapter 1: Worldviews
It is worth noting that the notion of a worldview is related to a variety of ideas
presented by Thomas Kuhn (1922–96) in The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions,
ﬁrst published in 1962. One of the key concepts in this work is the notion of a
“paradigm,” which is, very roughly, a shared collection (shared by the relevant
collection of scientists) of beliefs and approaches to problems (so in a sense, a
paradigm is a subset of a shared worldview). On Kuhn’s view, “paradigm shifts”
occasionally occur, when an existing scientiﬁc paradigm is replaced by a new
paradigm, and the existing worldview is replaced by another. The changes in the
1600s from the Aristotelian to Newtonian science, explored in Part II of the
present book, are one example of such a paradigm shift. It is worth noting that
according to Kuhn paradigm shifts occur very rarely, and he cautioned against
using the term too broadly. Despite his warning, his notion of a paradigm shift has
become one of the most popular and overworked notions in recent years. Kuhn’s
work, especially The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, has been one of the most
inﬂuential works of recent decades in the history and philosophy of science. If you
are interested in further exploring issues in this area, Kuhn’s Structure would
certainly be recommended reading.
The notion of a worldview, and especially the jigsaw puzzle analogy, also bears
some resemblance to Willard Van Orman Quine’s (1908–2000) notion of a web of
belief as found in, for example, Quine (1964). Quine’s preferred analogy was with
a web, in which core beliefs are represented by the inner parts of the web. The idea
is that changes in an inner part of a web require changes throughout the web, in a
way similar to the fact that changes in core beliefs require changes throughout
one’s collection of beliefs. In contrast, changes in the outer regions of a web can be
made without substantially altering the more inner regions of a web, similar to the
way changes in peripheral beliefs can be made without substantially altering the
overall collection of beliefs. Most of the anthologies mentioned in the notes above
will contain selected papers written by Quine, as well as discussions of Quine’s
views. Also, some of Quine’s views are discussed more fully in Chapter 5 of this
book.
As noted in the chapter, Aristotle’s own views are complex and, moreover, his
writing itself is difﬁcult. Relatively recent translations of some of Aristotle’s works
by Sachs (1995, 2001, 2002) tend to be more accessible than many older
translations, and Sachs’ commentary is helpful. The translations closest to the

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

original works are probably those of Apostle, as found in Aristotle (1966, 1969,
1991), but these are also the most difﬁcult to follow. McKeon’s translations, as
found in Aristotle (1973) are perhaps the most widely read translations. Also,
many of Aristotle’s works are available on the web, for example, at http://classics.
mit.edu/Browse/browse-Aristotle.html. For a quick overview of Aristotle, see
Robinson (1995). Barnes (1995) is a good anthology of more in-depth discussions
of some aspects of Aristotle. For brief but good discussions of Greek science
before and up to Aristotle, and Greek science after Aristotle, see Lloyd (1970,
1973). Lang (1998) is an excellent work on Aristotle’s physics, and Aristotle’s
general philosophy of nature.
A discussion of, and references for, Newton’s work and the Newtonian
worldview can be found in the Chapter Notes for Chapter 20.

Chapter 2: Truth
Generally, working scientists, especially physicists, are hesitant to discuss issues
involving truth, often characterizing truth (with some justiﬁcation) as a philo­
sophical rather than scientiﬁc issue. One notable exception to this is Steven
Weinberg (one of the leading modern physicists), who unabashedly says things
like “scientists like myself . . . think the task of science is to bring us closer and
closer to objective truth” (New York Times Review of Books, 45(15), 1998). Some of
Weinberg’s further reﬂections, including reﬂections on broader issues surround­
ing physics, can be found in Weinberg (1992), which is also a reasonably
accessible overview of the state of the art in modern physics.
With respect to philosophical treatments of theories of truth, Kirkham (1992) is
the most recent and comprehensive discussion of issues surrounding theories of
truth, and would be the most thorough source for those interested in investigating
theories of truth. It is a quite detailed work. With respect to the discussion of
Descartes in this chapter, a relatively recent translation of Descartes’ Meditations
is Descartes (1960). An interesting introduction to the Meditations, in which the
work is used to investigate a variety of philosophical issues, is Feldman (1986).

Chapter 3: Empirical Facts and Philosophical/Conceptual
Facts
It is worth mentioning that issues discussed in this chapter have close ties to what
is commonly referred to as the theory-ladenness of observation. The idea is,
roughly, that even seemingly straightforward empirical observations are generally
intertwined with various theories. For example, if we use a voltmeter to measure
the voltage of the current in the light socket next to our desk, all we will literally
observe is the position of a needle on a scale. To infer from this that we have a
voltage of, say, 110 volts requires accepting certain theories about the nature of
electricity, the way electric current interacts with measuring devices such as
voltmeters, the way voltmeters work, and so on. Many of the more contentious

333

334

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

issues presented by Kuhn (1962) involve such interplays between observation and
theory, and as noted earlier, familiarity with Kuhn’s main theses would be helpful
for anyone wishing to pursue issues in the history and philosophy of science.

Chapter 4: Conﬁrming and Disconﬁrming Evidence and
Reasoning
Most of the introductory books and anthologies mentioned earlier would be good
sources to further pursue issues involved in reasoning, especially conﬁrmation
and disconﬁrmation reasoning. Such books and anthologies would include Brody
and Grandy (1971), Curd and Cover (1998), Gale (1979), Klee (1997), Klee (1999),
and Klemke, Hollinger, and Kline (1988).
For an in-depth look at the complexities in a particular case of conﬁrmation/
disconﬁrmation reasoning, Laymon (1984) is an interesting account of the
observations of the bending of starlight during the 1919 eclipse. Laymon’s paper
provides a detailed analysis nicely illustrating how closely observations and
theories are intertwined, and how difﬁcult it can be to determine if an observation
predicted by a theory has actually been observed.

Chapter 5: The Quine–Duhem Thesis and Implications for
Scientiﬁc Method
With respect to issues involved in the Quine–Duhem thesis, the main sources
from the principal players are Duhem (1954, originally published in 1906) and
Quine (1964, 1969, 1980). A good discussion of many of the issues involved can be
found in Klee (1997). Papers related to these issues can be found in the
anthologies of Curd and Cover (1998) and Klee (1999).
A good and quite brief overview of Aristotle’s approach to science can be found
in Robinson (1995). The best original source for the material concerning
Descartes is Descartes (1960), and a more thorough collection of his works
can be found in Descartes (1931). As noted earlier, Feldman (1986) provides a very
introductory and accessible discussion of Descartes’ approach. Popper (1992) is
the classic source for his views on science, while further discussion of Popper, and
of approaches to science in general, can be found in the anthologies mentioned
earlier, notably Curd and Cover (1998), Klee (1999), and Klemke, Hollinger, and
Kline (1988).

Chapter 6: Philosophical Interlude: Problems and Puzzles of
Induction
The original source of what is now called Hume’s problem of induction is Hume
(1992, ﬁrst published 1739), especially Book I, Part III (although issues involving

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

induction are a common theme in the work). Hempel’s raven paradox can be
found in his “Studies in the Logic of Conﬁrmation,” originally published in 1945
and reprinted in Hempel (1965). Goodman’s views on the “new” riddle of
induction (that is, the one involving the predicate “grue”) can be found in
Goodman (1972, 1983). The example drawn from Heinlein’s novel Job can be
found in Heinlein (1990). Discussion of a wider variety of issues involving
induction, including discussion of Hempel and Goodman, can be found in Brody
and Grandy (1971), and Curd and Cover (1998).

Chapter 7: Falsiﬁability
As noted at the outset of this chapter, issues surrounding falsiﬁability are
surprisingly complex, and probably the best way to explore the topic further
is to see the way such issues play out in examples from the history of science. The
conﬂict between Galileo and the church, discussed more fully in Chapter 17, is
one such case. Good discussions of the Galileo case can be found (among others)
in Fantoli (1996), Biagioli (1993), Machamer (1998), Santillana (1955), and Sobel
(2000). Another case that involves many of the issues discussed in this chapter is
the creation science trials from the 1980s, and the discussion of this case in Part 1
of Curd and Cover (1998) is a good starting point. The cold fusion controversy is
another ongoing case illustrating many of the issues discussed in this chapter (and
especially of the way in which both sides claim it is the other side that is treating
their theories as unfalsiﬁable). Park (2001) is a good source illustrating the
ongoing problems with cold fusion. See www.lenr-canr.org for the point of
view of remaining defenders of cold fusion. Finally, the current defenders of
an Earth-centered view of the universe provide another example illustrating many
of the topics discussed in this chapter. See www.geocentricity.com for their point
of view.

Chapter 8: Instrumentalism and Realism
Many of the standard anthologies mentioned in regard to earlier chapters,
including Brody and Grandy (1971), Curd and Cover (1998), and Klemke,
Hollinger, and Kline (1988), provide further discussion of issues central to this
chapter, especially issues involving explanation. See Salmon (1998) for a more
thorough look at such issues.
An issue currently much debated in certain areas of the philosophy of science,
and one related to the instrumentalism–realism issue, is the realism–anti-realism
debate. The realism–anti-realism distinction and debate is similar, but not exactly
identical, to the realist–instrumentalist issue. The exact focus of the realism–anti­
realism debate has changed a number of times over the years, but, roughly, realists
maintain that descriptions given by our scientiﬁc theories (or at least, by our
mature theories) reﬂect the way things really are, and the entities that are at the

335

336

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

heart of such theories actually exist. Anti-realists maintain otherwise: even in the
case of our best theories, although they may be convenient and useful, there are no
good reasons to think that such theories reﬂect the way things really are, or to
think that the entities suggested by such theories really exist. Jones (1991)
provides a good introduction to many of the issues involved in this debate.
(Jones’ article is not intended as an introductory article, but I think it nonetheless
provides an accessible and interesting introduction.) Klee (1997) provides a good
introductory discussion of many of the key issues. And French, Uehling, and
Wettstein (1988) and Leplin (1984) are good collections of papers centering on
the realism/anti-realism issue.

Part II: The Transition from the Aristotelian Worldview to the
Newtonian Worldview
In terms of the general issues covered in Part II, good overviews of the scientiﬁc
developments can be found in Lindberg (1992), Cohen (1985), and Mason (1962).
Overviews of the interplay between scientiﬁc developments and philosophical
developments can be found in Burtt (1954), Dijksterhuis (1961), Kuhn (1957),
Matthews (1989), and Toulmin and Goodﬁeld (1961, 1962).

Chapter 9: The Structure of the Universe on the Aristotelian
Worldview
Cohen (1985) provides an introductory and very readable overview of the
Aristotelian view of the universe, especially the views on the physical structure
of the universe. Dijksterhuis (1961), Dreyer (1953), Kuhn (1957), Lindberg (1992),
and Toulmin and Goodﬁeld (1961) provide substantially more detailed discussion
both of views on the physical structure of the universe and of conceptual beliefs
about the universe. For those interested in exploring more speciﬁc issues in the
history of western science, especially during the medieval period, Lindberg (1978)
is a good starting point.

Chapter 10: The Preface to Ptolemy’s Almagest: The Earth as
Spherical, Stationary, and at the Center of the Universe
Ptolemy (1998) provides a recent translation of the Almagest. The preface to the
Almagest can be found in Munitz (1957), which is the source for the excerpt
included in this chapter. Munitz’s book also includes Aristotle’s arguments, from
On the Heavens, for the Earth as spherical, stationary, and at the center of the
universe. In generally, Munitz’s book provides a nice collection of excerpts
concerning views of the universe, ranging from early Babylonian writings to
twentieth-century views.

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

I am often asked how the ancients, including Ptolemy, could have known that
the sun, moon, stars, and planets rise at different times depending on where one is
located (at least located in the east–west direction). A modern example may help.
In fall 2015 my sister and I communicated about our observations of a particularly
nice total lunar eclipse that had occurred a few days earlier. She lives about 3,000
miles west of me and, for example, she described totality (when the entirety of the
moon is in the Earth’s shadow) as beginning at 7:30 p.m. local time with the moon
very low on the horizon. In my location, I observed totality beginning at 10:30 p.m.
local time with the moon quite high in the sky. From this we can infer not only
that the times of lunar eclipses differ, but also that the time the moon rises differs
depending on where one is located east and west on the Earth. And since the
moon is reported in both locations as in the same region of the sky relative to the
stars, sun, and planets, from this we can also ﬁgure out that those must rise and set
at different times depending on one’s east–west location. The ancients would
have made the same inferences, using records from various parts of the world of
the times of events such as eclipses.

Chapter 11: Astronomical Data: The Empirical Facts;
Chapter 12: Astronomical Data: The Philosophical/
Conceptual Facts
For further discussion of the material discussed in Chapter 11 and Chapter 12,
Dreyer (1953) and Kuhn (1957) are good starting points. More general discus­
sions of these topics can be found in Cohen (1985) and Pine (1989).

Chapter 13: The Ptolemaic System; Chapter 14: The
Copernican System; Chapter 15: The Tychonic System;
Chapter 16: Kepler’s System
Many of the original sources for the material discussed in Chapter 13 through
Chapter 16 are readily attainable in new translations. See Ptolemy (1998) for a
new translation, with commentary by the translator, of Ptolemy’s Almagest.
Likewise, Copernicus (1995) is a new translation, again with commentary, of
Copernicus’ major work On the Revolution of Heavenly Spheres. And Kepler
(1995) is a new translation of some of his key works.
Dreyer (1953) and Kuhn (1957) are the best secondary sources for general
descriptions of these systems. Gingerich (1993) is a collection of much more
speciﬁc and detailed papers by a leading scholar in this area, and this work also
provides good examples of the sort of more detailed research done in the history
of science.
As mentioned at the end of Chapter 15, the Tychonic system (or more
precisely, the Tychonic system modiﬁed so as to incorporate elliptical orbits
with planets moving at varying speeds) is the preferred system for those still

337

338

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

maintaining (generally for religious reasons) that the Earth is the center of the
universe. Further information on modern-day defenders of the Tychonic system
can be found at www.geocentricity.com. The writings of the defenders of geo­
centricity provide interesting illustrations of many of the issues discussed in Part I,
especially issues involving competing worldviews, falsiﬁability, evidence, and
conﬁrmation and disconﬁrmation reasoning.
Finally, an inexpensive digital orrery (that is, a computer-generated model of
the solar system) is available for most common electronic devices (smartphones,
computers, etc.). Digital orreries are quite useful for viewing simulations of the
solar system, and I recommend ﬁnding one for your favorite electronic device.
Many of these will allow you the option of having the Earth be the center of
planetary rotation, thereby providing a model of the modernized Tychonic system
mentioned several times in the book.

Chapter 17: Galileo and the Evidence from the Telescope
Galileo’s own writing is quite accessible, and translations of Galileo’s main
writings involving his work with the telescope, as well as his views on the Earthcentered versus sun-centered issue, can be found in Galileo (1957) and Galileo
(2001). Fantoli (1996) is a detailed and extremely well-referenced work on
Galileo, especially on the issues involving the church, and highly recommended
for additional reading on Galileo. Santillana (1955) is a more general account of
Galileo’s work, also with emphasis on issues involving Galileo and the church.
Machamer (1998) is a collection of more narrowly focused papers on aspects of
Galileo’s work, and provides a good sense of the sort of more detailed
scholarship involving Galileo. Biagioli (1993) and Sobel (2000) are somewhat
different, but quite enjoyable, approaches to Galileo’s life and work. The former
focuses on the role of court politics in Galileo’s work (as noted in the chapter,
Galileo was a member of the Medici court), while the latter emphasizes his
relationship with his daughter, using the surviving letters from his daughter to
provide a somewhat different look at the life and work of Galileo and his
daughter. For those interested in looking further into the Inquisition’s 1615–16
investigation into the Earth-centered versus sun-centered issue, as well as the
Inquisition’s later trial of Galileo, Mayer (2012) is a convenient collection of the
key original documents.
Finally, I would like to thank Greg Welty for bringing to my attention an
inconsistency in my earlier (second edition) description of Galileo’s views on the
reliability of scripture.

Chapter 18: A Summary of Problems Facing the Aristotelian
Worldview
Cohen (1985) and Kuhn (1957) provide good general accounts of the sorts of
problems facing the Aristotelian worldview in the early 1600s. A more detailed

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

account of developments at this time can be found in Dijksterhuis (1961) and
Mason (1962).

Chapter 19: Philosophical and Conceptual Connections in the
Development of the New Science
Kuhn (1957) provides further discussion on many of the topics discussed in this
chapter. Mason (1962), although focusing primarily on the history of science,
provides good detailed discussion of some of the broader issues discussed in this
chapter. Dijksterhuis (1961) and Toulmin and Goodﬁeld (1961) likewise provide
somewhat more detailed accounts of many of the topics touched on in this
chapter, and are good sources for further investigating these topics.

Chapter 20: Overview of the New Science and the Newtonian
Worldview
Newton’s Principia is highly recommended, and Newton (1999) is a new
translation, with extensive commentary provided by the translators. Cohen
(1985) again provides a general overview of these developments, while Dijkster­
huis (1961) and Mason (1962) provide more detailed accounts. Also, I want to
thank Charles Ess for his suggestion to include the discussion of instrumentalist
and realist attitudes toward Newton’s notion of gravity.

Chapter 21: Philosophical Interlude: What Is a Scientiﬁc Law?
An early and still classic work on issues involving laws is Hempel and Oppenheim
(1948). Armstrong (1983) and Carroll (1994) provide thorough treatments of these
issues, and Lange (2000) provides a good summary of standard views and offers an
alternative account. Cartwright (1983) provides an interesting and somewhat
different perspective on some of the common attitudes toward laws, as does Gierre
(1999). For early discussions of problems involving counterfactuals, Goodman
(1983) and Quine (1964) are good sources, as is Lewis (1973). For more on ceteris
paribus clauses, see Earman, Glymour, and Mitchell (2003), and Lange (2002a).

Chapter 22: The Development of the Newtonian Worldview,
1700–1900
Mason (1962) provides a good account of the scientiﬁc developments in the
period covered in this chapter, and Kragh (1999) is a good source for the situation
in physics at the end of the 1800s. Cushing (1998) likewise provides a good
investigation of many of the topics covered in this chapter, with more of an eye

339

340

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

toward the interactions between scientiﬁc questions and philosophical issues.
Everitt (1975) contains a detailed account of Maxwell’s contributions.

Part III: Recent Developments in Science and Worldviews
For general sources dealing with the material in Part III, Kragh (1999) is a
relatively new and quite detailed history of physics in the twentieth century,
covering the situation in physics ranging from the late 1800s to the end of the
1900s. Mason (1962) likewise covers developments in science, both biology and
physics, albeit somewhat more brieﬂy. The interplay between philosophy and
physics in recent years is nicely illustrated by many of the case studies in Cushing
(1998).

Chapter 23: The Special Theory of Relativity
The original source for the special theory of relativity is Einstein (1905), and
Einstein (1920) provides an accessible account of the theory. Mermin (1968) is an
excellent presentation of special relativity, which is thorough and precise while
presupposing nothing beyond basic algebra. A recent revision of this book,
Mermin (2005) is likewise a good source. D’Abro (1950) is another good
presentation of special relativity, while Kosso (1998) provides a general overview
of special relativity with an emphasis on certain philosophical consequences.
It is worth noting that “absolute space” and “absolute time” are often used in a
different way than I use them in this chapter. From the time of Newton and
Leibniz, and continuing today, there has been debate over whether space is an
entity existing separately from the objects that (presumably) exist within that
space. That is, is space a substance existing independently of objects, or does
space consist of nothing over and beyond the relations between objects? The
former view is generally considered a substantivalist view of space, with the latter
view a relational view of space. To use a common analogy, the substantivalist view
maintains that space is like a container, and objects exist within that container.
Importantly, on this view the container – that is, space – exists independently of,
and has properties independent of, the objects within the container. The
relational view of space rejects this “container” view of space, maintaining instead
that space consists of nothing more than the relations between objects. The term
“absolute space” is sometimes used to refer to the substantivalist view of space,
and again, this is a somewhat different use of the term than the way I use it in this
chapter. Similar questions arise for time as well – is time something that exists
independently of objects and events, or is time nothing over and above the
relations between objects and events?
Finally, in the body of the chapter I made reference to the Lorentz transfor­
mations, without specifying what those transformations are. For those who are
curious, suppose we let x, y, z, and t represent spatial and time dimensions in a
stationary coordinate system, and x´ , y´ , z´ , and t´ represent spatial and time

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

dimensions in a coordinate system moving in the x direction with velocity v (that
is, moving relative to the ﬁrst coordinate system, and as usual, moving in a straight
line with uniform speed). Deﬁne γ as follows:
1
γ  rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
v2
1
c
Then the Lorentz transformations are
 vx
t´  γ t
c2
x´  γ x vt
y´  y
z´  z
These are the transformations used, in the discussion of Joe’s spacetime
coordinate system and Sara’s spacetime coordinate system, to convert the
coordinates from one coordinate system to the other.

Chapter 24: The General Theory of Relativity
The original source of the general theory of relativity is Einstein (1916), and
Einstein (1920) again is an accessible discussion of the theory. D’Abro (1950) is
likewise a good source for discussion of the general theory.
As mentioned in the body of the chapter, ﬁgures such as Figure 24.2 are
typically two-dimensional “slices” through the four-dimensional spacetime. It is
not crucial for the discussion in the chapter, but you might notice that, in the
diagram, this two-dimensional slice is “embedded” in a three-dimensional
space, and for this reason such diagrams are typically referred to as embedding
diagrams. Also, I want to thank an anonymous reviewer for catching a
substantial mistake in my description of geodesics in an earlier draft of this
chapter.

Chapter 25: Philosophical Interlude: Are (Some) Scientiﬁc
Theories Incommensurable?
As noted in the chapter, in roughly the past half century Kuhn and Feyerabend
have been most closely associated with the notion of incommensurability. Kuhn
(1962) is the best source for his early views on the subject, and as mentioned
previously, this is one of the best-known works in the history and philosophy of
science, and well worth being familiar with. This book was reprinted in 1970 with
a worthwhile postscript in which Kuhn elaborates on his views on
incommensurability, progress in science, and more. Conant and Haugeland
(2000) is an excellent collection of papers, including several by Kuhn, comment­
ing on developments in topics raised in Kuhn (1962).

341

342

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

Feyerabend (1962) is a good source for his early views on incommensurability,
as well as his views on a variety of related topics. It is worth noting that
Feyerabend’s views on incommensurability are often presented in the context
of works that are primarily focused on theses other than incommensurability, for
example, arguments against there being any robust notion of unity among the
various sciences, arguments against the view that there is anything like a basic
methodology shared among the sciences, and more. Among the array of works by
Feyerabend that touch upon incommensurability, in addition to Feyerabend
(1962) I would recommend Feyerabend (1965, 1975, 1981).
In the chapter I noted that Duhem was one of the early ﬁgures, in the late 1800s
and early 1900s, to begin applying the notion of incommensurability beyond its
more rigidly deﬁned use with mathematics. Duhem (1954; originally published
1904) is a good source for his views.
For the original use of the notion of incommensurability by ancient Greek
mathematicians, and the important role this concept played in the discovery of
irrational numbers, Kline (1972) is an excellent three-volume work tracing the
development of mathematical thought from the ancient Babylonian and Egyptian
civilizations to modern times. Boyer (1968) is another good (single-volume) work
tracing the history of mathematics, and Klein (1968) is a good source for ancient
Greek mathematical developments.
Finally, the original source for the experiment involving anomalous playing
cards mentioned in the chapter is Bruner and Postman (1949).

Chapter 26: Introduction to Quantum Theory: Basic Empirical
Facts and the Mathematics of Quantum Theory
The emphasis on keeping clear the distinction between quantum facts,
quantum theory itself, and the interpretation of quantum theory is drawn
largely from Herbert (1985). The distinction is, I think, a very useful one to
keep in mind when reading the vast and often uneven literature on quantum
theory.
The quantum facts described in this chapter are fairly standard examples
widely used to illustrate some of the oddities associated with quantum facts. Pine
(1989) discusses similar experiments to those discussed here.
A general “descriptive” overview of the mathematics of quantum theory, similar
to that in this chapter, can be found in Herbert (1985). For more detailed accounts
of the mathematics, the best approach probably depends largely on one’s
mathematical background. My favorites are Hughes (1989), Baggott (1992),
and Baggott (2004).
In the body of the chapter I mentioned that I would provide a more detailed
summary of the mathematics of quantum theory. In summary: (a) a (pure) state
of a quantum system is represented by a vector in a Hilbert space; (b) each type of
measurement one might perform on a quantum system is associated with a
particular operator in the Hilbert space; and (c) predictions about the outcome
of a measurement on the quantum system are arrived at by ﬁnding the

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

eigenvalues associated with that operator (that is, the operator associated with
that measurement).
To understand (a), consider the two-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system
we studied in our earlier mathematical training, and suppose we have a line drawn
from the point (0,0) to some other arbitrary point, say the point (11,7). Such a line
would be an example of a vector, and a collection of such vectors is a vector space
over the two-dimensional space of the real numbers. Vector spaces can involve
three, four, or any (including inﬁnitely many) dimensions. Vector spaces can
likewise involve numbers other than the real numbers, and in the mathematics of
quantum theory, some particularly important vector spaces involve complex
numbers (that is, a number of the form a + bi, where a and b are real numbers,
and i is the imaginary number equal to the square root of 1)
Let’s use an analogy to get a rough idea of a Hilbert space. Consider the set of
vector spaces over the two-dimensional space of the real numbers. Note that
some of these vector spaces will meet various criteria. Some of these vector spaces
consist only of vectors that are speciﬁed by pairs of even numbers, some might
consist only of vectors speciﬁed by positive numbers, and others might consist
only of vectors for which certain mathematical operations can be applied. A
Hilbert space is a vector space that meets certain well-deﬁned, well-understood
criteria, and admits of certain types of mathematical operations. The speciﬁc
criteria are beyond the scope of our discussion, but this should sufﬁce to give at
least a general idea of a Hilbert space.
An operator in a Hilbert space is a function that operates on vectors, trans­
forming one vector into another. To understand the idea behind an eigenvalue,
consider again the set of all vectors over the space of the two-dimensional space of
the real numbers. Consider a particular operator O and a particular vector v.
Suppose Ov results in a vector twice the length of v, which we will write as 2v.
Note that O may not simply be a doubling operator, that is, it may not double the
length of all vectors. But there may be certain vectors, such as v, for which O
results in a vector twice the length of the original. That is, for this particular
vector, Ov = 2v. In this case, v is called an eigenvector of O, and 2 is the
corresponding eigenvalue. Likewise, if Ov = 3v, then v is an eigenvector of O
and 3 is the corresponding eigenvalue. Also, some operators have no eigenvectors
and hence no corresponding eigenvalues. Hilbert spaces are more complicated
vector spaces, and the notion of eigenvectors and eigenvalues for such spaces is
more difﬁcult to picture. But the analogy with the simpler vector space over the
space of the two-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system should give a ﬂavor of
what these are like.
Recall that an operator is a function that transforms one vector into another,
and, from (b) above, we know that possible measurements on a quantum system
are associated with particular operators on the Hilbert space. With respect to (c)
above: most of the time (though not always) the operators associated with
measurements will have eigenvectors and corresponding eigenvalues. The eigen­
values represent the possible results of the measurement associated with the
operator. In particular, from the eigenvalue and the vector representing the state
of the system, together with a special operator called a projection operator, one
can calculate a probability between 0 and 1. And that probability represents the

343

344

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

probability of observing the particular measurement outcome associated with
that eigenvalue.

Chapter 27: The Reality Question: The Measurement Problem
and Interpretations of Quantum Theory
There are an enormous number of books, of quite uneven quality, generally
revolving around the interpretation of quantum theory and including discussions
of the measurement problem. Here I will note a few of the books I think are of
better quality. As mentioned in the chapter, the physicist John Bell has articulated
concerns about the measurement problem and issues involving interpretations
more thoroughly and clearly than probably anyone else. Bell (1988) Speakable
and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics is an excellent collection of his writings
on these and related issues. Herbert (1985) is another good source, written by a
physicist but for a general audience, and although he has his preferred interpre­
tation, Herbert provides an even-handed treatment of the options. Baggott (1992)
likewise is a good discussion of quantum theory and issues involved in the
interpretation of quantum theory. Baggott’s book, incidentally, is subtitled A
Guide for Students of Chemistry and Physics. I would ignore the subtitle, in that
the book is a good guide to quantum theory and the interpretation of quantum
theory, regardless of whether you are a student of physics or chemistry. Baggott
(2004) is a substantial revision and expansion of this work, and also recom­
mended. The last chapter of Lange (2002b) likewise provides a good discussion of
these issues. Also, I would like to thank Marc Lange for catching a substantial
mistake in my discussion of Bohm’s interpretation in an earlier draft of this
chapter.
In the body of the chapter I broadly distinguish between collapse interpreta­
tions and non-collapse interpretations. Collapse interpretations, as used in the
chapter, should not be confused with what are sometimes referred to as collapse
theories. The phrase “collapse theories” has come to be used to describe relatively
recent research projects that attempt to provide a modiﬁed mathematics for
quantum theory, but a mathematics that, unlike Bohm’s approach, does not
proceed by way of hidden variables. Collapse theories, then, are not interpreta­
tions of the standard mathematics for quantum theory, but rather are attempts to
provide a modiﬁed mathematical framework. Notably, collapse theories, unlike
Bohm’s approach, appear to provide in some cases predictions that differ from the
predictions of the standard approach, though at present these seem unable to be
tested due to practical considerations.

Chapter 28: Quantum Theory and Locality: EPR, Bell’s
Theorem, and the Aspect Experiments
Herbert (1985) provides a good general discussion of the topics in this chapter,
and as noted, my explanation of Bell’s theorem draws substantially from Herbert’s

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

presentation. Baggott (1992, 2004) also provide excellent, and somewhat more
detailed, accounts of these issues. For issues involving locality, Maudlin (1994) is a
detailed and careful analysis of the quite complex issues involved, and is highly
recommended for anyone interested in further pursuing topics involving locality
and nonlocality.
Since the original Aspect experiments in the early 1980s, experiments
involving tests of Bell-like inﬂuences have become commonplace (such experi­
ments are often referred to as Bell tests or Bell experiments). Generally, these
experiments go beyond the experimental setup used in the original Aspect
experiments. For example, whereas in the original Aspect experiments the
detectors were separated by about 10 meters, more recent experiments have
increased this distance substantially, including some with detectors over 100
kilometers apart. There is currently a proposed experiment for the Interna­
tional Space Station (ISS), where one detector would be on the ISS and the other
in a ground-based laboratory (so the distance would be about 400 kilometers).
China has recently launched a satellite dedicated to experiments involving
quantum theory, including planned tests of Bell-like inﬂuences at distances of
over 1,000 kilometers.
Another category of Bell tests involves closing what are commonly referred to
as loopholes. In this context, loopholes are essentially auxiliary hypotheses of the
sort discussed frequently in this book. As noted, Bell tests to date have strongly
suggested that reality must be nonlocal. However, in such experiments it is
important that the setting of the detectors be random, and thus one could try to
preserve locality by questioning whether the settings genuinely were random. For
example, perhaps something in the common past of the devices used to generate
randomness resulted in the settings not being truly random. To help close this
loophole, a team of physicists have recently been conducting a series of Bell
experiments using increasingly distant sources to generate randomness. Their
most recent experiments (a description can be found at https://phys.org/news/
2017-02-physicists-loophole-bell-inequality-year-old.html) generated random
settings based on light from stars hundreds of light years away. These stars
have not shared a common past for over 600 years, and thus if there is anything in
their past that prevented them from being sources of genuine randomness, it had
to have happened over 600 years ago. The next series of experiments will use
quasars billions of light years away as a source of randomness, and if, as expected,
the results are the same as with previous Bell tests, any common cause preventing
genuine randomness would had to have happened billions of years ago. And this,
it is widely agreed, would be extraordinarily implausible. In short, such experi­
ments are increasingly closing various loopholes. Or in other words, they are
showing that attempts to save locality by appeal to such auxiliary hypotheses are
quite implausible.

Chapter 29: Overview of the Theory of Evolution
Desmond and Moore (1991) is a relatively recent, thorough, and highly recom­
mended biography of Darwin and his work. Quammen (2006) is a much shorter

345

346

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

account, though informative and accessible, and also recommended. For Darwin’s
key work, Darwin (1964) is a good facsimile of the ﬁrst edition of the Origin of
Species.
It is worth mentioning that some of Darwin’s and Wallace’s key ideas had
been, at least in a limited way, hinted at earlier. For example, Darwin’s
grandfather Erasmus Darwin had hinted (somewhat obscurely) at ideas
similar to the key ingredients of natural selection. Likewise, an expert in
wood products for shipbuilding named Patrick Matthews, 30 years before
Darwin and Wallace published their key works on evolution, had articulated
principles quite similar to the basic ideas behind natural selection. Darwin’s
grandfather, however, suggested his ideas mainly in some of his published
poetry rather than in any sort of scientiﬁc publication. And Matthews men­
tioned these principles in the context of a book devoted to the best sources of
wood for naval purposes, and beyond this, he never promoted or defended these
key ideas (at least not until after the publication of Darwin’s and Wallace’s key
works). In short, Darwin and Wallace deserve primary credit, if not for being the
absolute ﬁrst to develop the key ideas, then at least for being the individuals
responsible for thoroughly articulating and defending them. And of these two,
for reasons explained in the body of the chapter, Darwin deserves the major
share of the credit.
Mayr (1982) is an extensive and detailed account of developments in biology in
recent centuries, including evolutionary theory. Provine (1971) is likewise a good
source. For briefer overviews, Mason (1962) provides a quick overview of key
developments, as does Silver (1998). Wilson (1969) and Greene (1969) provide a
more detailed discussion within the context of broader developments in biology
during the time surrounding Darwin’s and Wallace’s key works.
Fisher (1999) is a key work in the eventual development of population genetics,
and Williams (1966) and Hartl (1981) provide thorough accounts of this ﬁeld. The
relevant chapters in Mayr (1982) also provide good additional information on this
subject.
Watson and Crick (1953) is a classic paper announcing the discovery of the
structure of DNA, and well worth reading. Olby (1974) is a good thorough
account of this discovery. This time is also a rich period for exploring broader
questions on the conduct of science, such as the reluctance to acknowledge
important contributions of women working in this ﬁeld. Watson and Crick, for
example, failed to acknowledge the work of Rosalind Franklin, even though their
discoveries concerning the structure of DNA hinged crucially on her work. Fox
Keller (1983) and Sayre (1975) provide good starting points for further explora­
tion of these topics.
As noted in the body of the chapter, it is difﬁcult to overemphasize the areas of
research that recent discoveries have made possible, especially the discovery of
restriction enzymes and subsequent tools for manipulating DNA. Abzhanov et al.
(2006), Bergman and Siegal (2003), and Mecklenburg (2010) are good examples.
Finally, I’d like to thank my colleague Jim Long for assistance and helpful
discussions of possible translations of Latin phrases from Darwin’s notebooks
mentioned in the chapter. Darwin’s handwriting was terrible, and so this was no
easy task.

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

Chapter 30: Reﬂections on Evolution
Good sources for the views of those discussed in the chapter making the case that
evolution, and modern science in general, leaves little or no room for anything like
a traditional God are Dennett (1995, 2006) and Dawkins (2006). To a lesser
extent, but still foreshadowing writings to come later, Dawkins (1976) and
Weinberg (1992) are interesting reads. Two prominent writers taking a somewhat
different line of argument, though not mentioned in the text, are Harris (2004,
2007) and Hitchens (2007). For Haught’s views, see primarily Haught (2008a,
2008b), but also Haught (2001). For other related approaches to reconciling
religion and evolution, see Mooney (1996) and Miller (1999). A work somewhat
further aﬁeld of the material in this chapter, but still an interesting take on
evolution and religion, is Miller (2008).
For the discussion of morality and ethics, Ruse and Wilson’s views are most
thoroughly articulated in Ruse (1998) and Wilson (1978). Ruse (2009) is an
excellent collection of articles on these and related matters.
For early work on the iterated prisoner’s dilemma, the best sources are Axelrod
(1980a, 1980b, 1984). Studies involving the ultimatum game, trust game, and
others can be found in Gintis et al. (2004), Kosfeld et al. (2005), and Bohnet and
Zeckhauser (2004). A detailed and thorough treatment of a range of issues
involving altruism and unselﬁsh behavior can be found in Sober and Wilson
(1998).
Regarding the naturalistic fallacy, the classic source is Moore (1962), which was
ﬁrst published in 1903, though the version discussed in this chapter dates back to
Hume (1992), ﬁrst published in 1739. The other version of what is often termed
the “naturalistic fallacy,” and the version of primary interest to Moore, is an
argument that any attempt to provide a naturalistic foundation for normative
ethical claims is misguided. In support of this, Moore notes what is now
commonly referred to as the open question argument: given any alleged identiﬁ­
cation of something morally good with some natural property, it will still make
sense to ask of something having that natural property whether it is good. In other
words, given that something has the property is question, it is still an open
question as to whether it is good, and if it is still an open question, good must not
consist in having that natural property.
In the body of the chapter I mention the “problem of the criterion,” which is a
problem concerning the justiﬁcation of beliefs that arises when different groups
disagree on the proper criteria to use in evaluating beliefs. The problem was
recognized as early as the ancient Greeks. A classic example can be found in the
Protestant Reformation beginning in the 1500s. Followers of reformation leaders
such as Martin Luther, and defenders of the traditional approach of the Catholic
church, disagreed on what the correct criteria were for determining whether
certain religious views were or were not correct. When there is this sort of deep
disagreement over what the proper criteria are for evaluating beliefs, there really is
little chance of the differing sides resolving the dispute rationally – the two sides
lack any common understanding on how to rationally resolve the dispute.
Note that most situations involving disagreements are not situations involving
the problem of the criterion. For example, suppose you and I are involved in a car

347

348

Chapter Notes and Suggested Reading

accident, and we disagree over who is responsible. While we disagree on who is
responsible, generally we will agree on the proper criteria to resolve the dispute.
For example, we will likely agree that the law is the proper criterion to use, and we
will resolve the dispute through the court system.
Consider the situation discussed in the chapter. Here, one side considers
empirical evidence to be the only (or at least by far the primary) criteria to use in
evaluating beliefs, whereas the other side believes criteria going beyond empirical
evidence are proper. This seems a classic problem of the criterion situation, and
thus unlikely to be resolved by rational debate.

Chapter 31: Worldviews: Concluding Thoughts
For those interested in the role of metaphors and analogies in science, Hesse
(1966) would be a good starting point. Other than this, the chapter is somewhat of
an overview of topics we have discussed, and of what the future might bring, and
so there is not a great deal to mention in the way of notes, sources, and suggested
reading. Instead I’ll close with a note I’ve mentioned several times. I hope in this
book to have provided a foundation solid enough to enable you to explore these
topics further. It’s a fascinating ﬁeld – enjoy!

349

References
Abzhanov A., Kuo W., Hartmann C., Grant B., Grant P., and Tabin C. (2006) “The
Calmodulin Pathway and Evolution of Elongated Beak Morphology in Darwin’s
Finches,” Nature 442, pp. 563–567.
Alic, M. (1986) Hypatia’s Heritage: A History of Women in Science from Antiquity
Through the Nineteenth Century, Beacon Press, Boston.
Aristotle (1966) Aristotle’s Metaphysics, translated by H. Apostle, Indiana University
Press, Bloomington.
Aristotle (1969) Aristotle’s Physics, translated by H. Apostle, Indiana University
Press, Bloomington.
Aristotle (1973) Introduction to Aristotle, second edition, translated by R. McKeon,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Aristotle (1991) Aristotle: Selected Works, third edition, translated by H. Apostle and
L. Gerson, The Peripatetic Press, Grinnell, IA.
Armstrong, D. (1983) What is a Law of Nature, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Axelrod, R. (1980a) “Effective Choice in the Prisoner’s Dilemma,” Journal of Conﬂict
Resolution 24 (1), 3–25.
Axelrod, R. (1980b) “More Effective Choice in the Prisoner’s Dilemma,” Journal of
Conﬂict Resolution 24 (3), 379–403.
Axelrod, R. (1984) The Evolution of Cooperation, Basic Books, New York.
Baggott, J. (1992) The Meaning of Quantum Theory: A Guide for Students of
Chemistry and Physics, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Baggott, J. (2004) Beyond Measure: Modern Physics, Philosophy and the Meaning of
Quantum Theory, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Barnes, J. (ed.) (1995) The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Bell, J. S. (1964) “On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox,” Physics 1, 195–200.
Bell, J. S. (1988) Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics: Collected
Papers on Quantum Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Bell, J. S. (1990) “Against ‘Measurement’,” Physics World 3, 32–40.
Bergman, A., and Siegal, M. L. (2003) “Evolutionary Capacitance as a General
Feature of Complex Gene Networks,” Nature 424, 549–552.
Biagioli, M. (1993) Galileo, Courtier, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

350

References

Bohnet, I., and Zeckhauser, R. (2004) “Trust, Risk and Betrayal,” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 55, 467–484.
Boyer, C. (1968) A History of Mathematics, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Brody, B., and Grandy, R. (eds.) (1971) Readings in the Philosophy of Science,
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Bruner, J. S., and Postman, L. (1949) “On the Perception of Incongruity: A
Paradigm,” Journal of Personality 18, 206–223.
Burtt, E. (1954) The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Science, Doubleday, New
York.
Carroll, J. (1994) Laws of Nature, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Cartwright, N. (1983) How the Laws of Physics Lie, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Clagett, M. (ed.) (1969) Critical Problems in the History of Science, University of
Wisconsin Press, Madison.
Cohen, I. (1985) The Birth of a New Physics, W. W. Norton, New York.
Conant, J., and Haugeland, J. (eds.) (2000) The Road Since Structure, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Copernicus, N. (1995) On the Revolution of Heavenly Spheres, translated by C.
Wallis, Prometheus Books, Buffalo, NY.
Curd, M., and Cover, J. (eds.) (1998) Philosophy of Science: The Central Issues, W.
W. Norton, New York.
Cushing, J. (1998) Philosophical Concepts in Physics: The Historical Relation
between Philosophy and Scientiﬁc Theories, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
D’Abro, A. (1950) The Evolution of Scientiﬁc Thought, Dover Publications, New
York.
Darwin, C. (1964) On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Dawkins, R. (1976) The Selﬁsh Gene, Oxford University Press, New York.
Dawkins, R. (2006) The God Delusion, Houghton Mifﬂin Co., Boston.
Dennett, D. (1995) Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life,
Simon and Schuster, New York.
Dennett, D. (2006) Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon, Penguin
Books, New York.
Descartes, R. (1931) The Philosophical Works of Descartes, volume 1, translated by
E. Haldane and G. Ross, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Descartes, R. (1960) Meditations on First Philosophy, translated by L. LaFleur,
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Deschanel, P. (1885) Elementary Treatise on Natural Philosophy, eighth edition,
translated by J. Everett, Blackie and Son, London.
Desmond, A., and Moore, J. (1991) Darwin: The Life of a Tormented Evolutionist,
W. W. Norton, New York.
Dijksterhuis, E. (1961) The Mechanization of the World Picture, translated by C.
Dikshoorn, Oxford University Press, London.
Dreyer, J. (1953) A History of Astronomy from Thales to Kepler, Dover Publications,
New York.
Duhem, P. (1954) The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, translated by P.
Wiener, Princeton University Press, Princeton, originally published in 1906.

References

Earman, J., Glymour, C., and Mitchell, S. (eds.) (2003), Ceteris Paribus Laws,
Springer Publishing, Berlin.
Einstein, A. (1905) “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies,” Annalen der Physik
17.
Einstein, A. (1916) “The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity,” Annalen
der Physik 49.
Einstein, A. (1920) Relativity: The Special and General Theory, Henry Holt, New
York.
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., and Rosen, N. (1935) “Can Quantum-Mechanical
Description of Physical Reality be Considered Complete?” Physical Review 47,
777–780.
Everitt, C. (1975) James Clerk Maxwell: Physicist and Natural Philosopher, Charles
Scribner’s Sons, New York.
Fantoli, A. (1996) Galileo: For Copernicanism and for the Church, translated by G.
Coyne, University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, IN.
Feldman, F. (1986) A Cartesian Introduction to Philosophy, McGraw-Hill, New
York.
Feyerabend, P. (1962) “Explanation, Reduction and Empiricism,” in H. Feigl and G.
Maxwell (eds) Scientiﬁc Explanation, Space, and Time (Minnesota Studies in the
Philosophy of Science, volume 3), Minneapolis: University of Minneapolis Press,
pp. 28–97.
Feyerabend, P. (1965) “On the ‘Meaning’ of Scientiﬁc Terms,” Journal of Philosophy
62, 266–274.
Feyerabend, P. (1975) Against Method. Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of
Knowledge, New Left Books, London.
Feyerabend, P. (1981) Realism, Rationalism and Scientiﬁc Method (Philosophical
Papers, volume 1), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fisher, R. A. (1999) The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection, Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Fox Keller, E. (1983) A Feeling for the Organism: The Life and Work Of Barbara
McClintock, Freeman Publishers, San Francisco.
French, P., Uehling, T., and Wettstein, H. (1988) Realism and Antirealism (Midwest
Studies in Philosophy, volume 12), University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
Gale, G. (1979) Theory of Science: An Introduction to the History, Logic, and
Philosophy of Science, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Galileo (1957) Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo: Including the Starry Messenger,
translated by S. Drake, Anchor Books, New York.
Galileo (2001), Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, translated by S.
Drake, Modern Library, New York.
Gierre, R. (1999) Science without Laws, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Gintis, H., Bowles, S., Boyd, R., and Fehr, E. (2004) “Explaining Altruistic Behavior
in Humans,” Evolution and Human Behavior 24, 153–172.
Gingerich, O. (1993) The Eye of Heaven: Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler, Springer
Verlag, Heidelberg.
Goodman, N. (1972) Problems and Projects, Bobbs-Merrill Co., Indianapolis.
Goodman, N. (1983) Fact, Fiction, and Forecast, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.

351

352

References

Greene, J. (1969) “Biology and Social Theory in the Nineteenth Century: Auguste
Comte and Herbert Spencer,” in M. Claggett (ed.) Critical Problems in the History
of Science, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison.
Harding, S. (1986) The Science Question in Feminism, Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, NY.
Harris, S. (2004) The End of Faith: Religion, Terror, and the Future of Reason, W. W.
Norton, New York.
Harris, S. (2007) Letter to a Christian Nation, Knopf, New York.
Hartl, D. (1981) A Primer of Population Genetics, Sinauer Associates, Sunderland,
MA.
Haught, J. (2001) Responses to 101 Questions on God and Evolution, Paulist Press,
New York.
Haught, J. (2008a) God After Darwin: A Theology of Evolution, Westview Press,
Boulder, CO.
Haught, J. (2008b) God and the New Atheism: A Critical Response to Dawkins,
Harris, and Hitchens, Westminster John Knox Press, Louisville, KY.
Hempel, C., and Oppenheim, P. (1948) “Studies in the Logic of Explanation,”
Philosophy of Science 15, 135–175.
Hempel, G. (1965) Aspects of Scientiﬁc Explanation, Macmillan Publishing, New
York.
Heinlein, R. (1990) Job: A Comedy of Justice, Ballantine Books, New York.
Herbert, N. (1985) Quantum Reality: Beyond the New Physics, Doubleday, New
York.
Hesse, M. (1966) Models and Analogies in Science, University of Notre Dame Press,
Notre Dame, IN.
Hitchens, C. (2007) God is Not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything, Hachette
Book Group, New York.
Hughes, R. (1989) The Structure and Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Hull, D., and Ruse, M. (eds.) (1998) The Philosophy of Biology, Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Hume, D. (1992) Treatise of Human Nature, Prometheus Books, Buffalo, NY,
originally published in 1739.
Jones, R. (1991) “Realism about What?” Philosophy of Science 58, 185–202.
Kepler, J. (1995) Epitome of Copernican Astronomy and Harmonies of the World,
translated by C. Wallis, Prometheus Books, Buffalo, NY.
Kirkham, R. (1992) Theories of Truth, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Klee, R. (1997) Introduction to the Philosophy of Science, Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Klee, R. (1999) Scientiﬁc Inquiry: Readings in the Philosophy of Science, Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Klein, J. (1968) Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra, Dover
Publications, New York.
Klemke, E., Hollinger, R., and Kline, A. (eds.) (1988) Introductory Readings in the
Philosophy of Science, Prometheus Books, Buffalo, NY.
Kline, M. (1972) Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times, Oxford
University Press, Oxford.

References

Kosfeld, M., Heinrichs, M., Zak, P., Fischbacher, U., and Fehr, E. (2005) “Oxytocin
Increases Trust in Humans,” Nature 435, 673–676.
Kosso, P. (1998) Appearance and Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of
Physics, Oxford University Press, New York.
Kragh, H. (1999) Quantum Generations: A History of Physics in the Twentieth
Century, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Kuhn, T. (1957) The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy in the
Development of Western Thought, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Kuhn, T. (1962) The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Lang, H. (1998) The Order of Nature in Aristotle’s Physics, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Lange, M. (2000) Natural Laws in Scientiﬁc Practice, Oxford University Press, New
York.
Lange, M. (2002a), “Who’s Afraid of Ceteris-Paribus Laws? Or: How I Learned to
Stop Worrying and Love Them,” Erkenntnis 57, 407–423.
Lange, M. (2002b) An Introduction to the Philosophy of Physics: Locality, Fields,
Energy, and Mass, Blackwell, Oxford.
Laymon, R. (1984) “The Path from Data to Theory,” in J. Leplin (ed.), Scientiﬁc
Realism, University of California Press, Berkeley, pp. 108–123.
Leplin, J. (ed.) (1984) Scientiﬁc Realism, University of California Press, Berkeley.
Lewis, D. (1973) Counterfactuals, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Lindberg, D. (ed.) (1978) Science in the Middle Ages, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Lindberg, D. (1992) The Beginnings of Western Science: The European Scientiﬁc
Tradition in Philosophical, Religious, and Institutional Context, 600 BC to AD 1450,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Lloyd, G. (1970) Early Greek Science: Thales to Aristotle, W. W. Norton, New York.
Lloyd, G. (1973) Greek Science After Aristotle, W. W. Norton, New York.
Losse, J. (1972) A Historical Introduction to the Philosophy of Science, Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Machamer, P. (ed.) (1998) The Cambridge Companion to Galileo, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Malthus, T. (1798) An Essay on the Principle of Population, Joseph Johnson,
London.
Mason, S. (1962) A History of the Sciences, Macmillan Publishing, New York.
Matthews, M. (ed.) (1989) The Scientiﬁc Background to Modern Philosophy, Hackett,
Indianapolis.
Maudlin, T. (1994) Quantum Non-Locality and Relativity, Blackwell, Oxford.
Mayer, T. (ed.) (2012) The Trial of Galileo, University of Toronto Press, North
York, Ontario.
Mayr, E. (1982) The Growth of Biological Thought, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Mecklenburg, K. (2010) “Retinophilin is a Light-Regulated Phosphoprotein Required
to Suppress Photoreceptor Dark Noise in Drosophila,” The Journal of
Neuroscience 30 (4), 1238–1249.
Mermin, D. (1968) Space and Time in Special Relativity, McGraw-Hill, New York.

353

354

References

Mermin, D. (2005) It’s About Time: Understanding Einstein’s Relativity, Princeton
University Press, Princeton.
Miller, K. (1999) Finding Darwin’s God: A Scientist’s Search for Common Ground
Between God and Evolution, Harper Press, New York.
Miller, K. (2008) Only a Theory: Evolution and the Battle for America’s Soul, Viking
Press, New York.
Mooney, C. (1996) Theology and Scientiﬁc Knowledge, University of Notre Dame
Press, Notre Dame, IN.
Moore, G. E. (1962) Principia Ethica, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA,
originally published in 1903.
Munitz, M. (ed.) (1957) Theories of the Universe: From Babylonian Myth to Modern
Science, Free Press, New York.
Newton, I. (1999) The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy,
translated by B. I. Cohen and A. Whitman, University of California Press,
Berkeley.
Olby, R. (1974) The Path to the Double Helix, University of Washington Press,
Seattle.
Park, R. (2001) Voodoo Science: The Road from Foolishness to Fraud, Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Pine, R. (1989) Science and the Human Prospect, Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
Popper, K. (1992) Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientiﬁc Knowledge,
Routledge, London.
Provine, W. (1971) Origins of Theoretical Population Genetics, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Ptolemy, C. (1998) Ptolemy’s Almagest, translated by G. Toomer, Princeton
University Press, Princeton.
Pyenson, L., and Sheets-Pyenson, S. (1999) Servants of Nature: A History of Scientiﬁc
Institutions, Enterprises, and Sensibilities, W. W. Norton, New York.
Quammen, D. (2006) The Reluctant Mr. Darwin: An Intimate Portrait of Charles
Darwin and the Making of His Theory of Evolution, W. W. Norton, New York.
Quine, W. (1964) Word and Object, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Quine, W. (1969) Ontological Relativity and Other Essays, Columbia University
Press, New York.
Quine, W. (1980) From a Logical Point of View, second edition, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Robinson, T. (1995) Aristotle in Outline, Hackett, Indianapolis.
Ruse, M. (1998) Taking Darwin Seriously, Prometheus Books, Amherst, NY.
Ruse, M. (ed.) (2009) Philosophy After Darwin, Princeton University Press,
Princeton.
Sachs, J. (1995) Aristotle’s Physics, Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ.
Sachs, J. (2001) Aristotle’s On the Soul and On Memory and Recollection, Green
Lion Press, Sante Fe, NM.
Sachs, J. (2002) Aristotle’s Metaphysics, Green Lion Press, Sante Fe, NM.
Salmon, W. (1998) Causality and Explanation, Oxford University Press, New York.
Santillana, G. (1955) The Crime of Galileo, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Sayre, A. (1975) Rosalind Franklin and DNA, W. W. Norton, New York.
Silver, B. (1998) The Ascent of Science, Oxford University Press, New York.

References

Sobel, D. (2000) Galileo’s Daughter, Penguin Books, New York.
Sober, E., and Wilson, D. S. (1998) Unto Others: The Evolution and Psychology of
Unselﬁsh Behavior, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Toulmin, S., and Goodﬁeld, J. (1961) The Fabric of the Heavens: The Development of
Astronomy and Dynamics, Harper and Row, New York.
Toulmin, S., and Goodﬁeld, J. (1962) The Architecture of Matter, Harper and Row,
New York.
Watson J. D., and Crick F. H. (1953). “Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids: A
Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid.” Nature 171, 737–738.
Weinberg, S. (1992) Dreams of a Final Theory, Pantheon Books, New York.
Whitehead, A. N. (1978) Process and Reality, Free Press, New York.
Williams, G. (1966) Adaptation and Natural Selection, Princeton University Press,
Princeton.
Wilson, E. O. (1978) On Human Nature, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Wilson, J. W. (1969) “Biology Attains Maturity in the Nineteenth Century,” in M.
Claggett (ed.) Critical Problems in the History of Science, University of Wisconsin
Press, Madison.

355

357

Index
absolute space 193–5, 322–3, 330
absolute time 193–5, 322, 340
action at a distance 169, 170, 217, 270,
281–2, 285
aether see ether
alchemists 180
allegory of the cave 121–2
alleles 289, 291–2
Almagest (Ptolemy) 81–91, 104, 106–7,
336–7
altruism 310, 315–16, 318, 347
kin altruism 310
reciprocal altruism 310
Aristotelian worldview see worldviews,
Aristotelian
Aristotle 7–12, 14, 48–51, 75, 82, 90,
100–4, 107, 113, 156–8, 167,
200–1, 223–5, 270, 320–1,
332–4, 336
Aspect experiments 272–3, 280–5, 324,
326, 344–5
astrology 94
astronomical tables 123–4, 137, 153–4
atomism 159, 161–2
Augustine, Saint 29
auxiliary hypotheses 41–2, 44–6, 52–3,
62–3, 73, 87, 89, 345
Axelrod, Robert 310, 312, 347
axiomatic approach 48–51
Bacon, Francis 45
Beagle, HMS 293–4, 296
beam splitter experiment 237, 251–2,
254, 267
Bell, John 2, 256, 258, 272–3, 276–85,
324–5, 344–5

Bellarmine, Cardinal 149–53, 306
Bell-like inﬂuences 281, 324–5, 345
Bell’s theorem (Bell’s inequality) 2, 272–3,
276–81, 324, 344
bending of starlight 36, 39, 52, 214, 216,
218, 334
biology 8, 40, 179, 181–2, 227, 288,
293–4, 301, 330–1, 340, 346
black body radiation 184, 187–8, 190
Bohm, David 265–7
bottleneck effects see genetic drift
Bruno, Giordano 159, 161
calculus 164, 169
Cartesian coordinate system 207, 343
cathode rays 189
Catholic Church 137–9, 148, 150,
347
causal locality see locality, causal
ceteris paribus clauses 175–8, 339
Charles I 168
chemistry 40, 179–82, 255, 331, 344
Christianity 12, 103, 122, 138, 150, 156,
167, 293
chromosomes 288
Clavius, Christopher 150
cogito, ergo sum 28–9
cold fusion 37, 41, 45–6, 63, 335
collapse interpretations see interpretations,
collapse
collapse of the wave function 252, 256,
258–9, 261, 263–4, 267–9
collapse theories 344
common sense 14–15, 22, 84–6, 104, 155,
210, 264, 268, 323
complex numbers see numbers, complex

Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science, Third Edition.
Richard DeWitt.
 2018 Richard DeWitt. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

358

Index

conﬁrmation reasoning 36–40, 42, 45–6,
48, 51–3, 73, 83, 146–7, 212, 214, 216,
334–5, 338
consciousness-dependent reality 262–3
context dependence 176–7
context of discovery 53
context of justiﬁcation 53
cooperation, evolution of 310–18
Copenhagen (standard)
interpretation 259–65
Copernican system 70, 92, 104, 115–26,
128–9, 131, 134, 136, 139, 148,
329–30, 337
Copernicus, Nicholas 3, 92, 95, 115–18,
121–4, 128, 132, 136, 149, 331
core beliefs 11, 13, 44–5, 64, 142, 156,
164, 166, 170, 179, 306, 318, 321–4,
332
corpuscular view see atomism
Coulomb, Charles 183
Coulomb’s law 183
counterfactual conditionals 174–6, 178
crucial experiments 45–6
Curie, Marie 189, 329
Curie, Pierre 189
curvature of spacetime 213–18, 322–3
Cusa, Nicholas de 159, 161
Dalton, John 180
Darwin, Charles 2, 182, 286–9, 292–300,
303, 306, 310, 313, 319, 326, 331,
345–6
Darwin, Erasmus 346
Dawkins, Richard 301, 347
deductive reasoning 37–8, 40, 42, 48–53,
199
deferent 107–12, 115–18, 121, 131
Democritus 161
demonstration 49, 151
Dennett, Daniel 301, 347
Descartes, René 25, 28–9, 51, 81, 100,
162, 165, 333–4
Deschanel, Privat 185
Devil’s Tower 23–4
Dialogues Concerning the Two Chief World
Systems 152
differential ﬁtness 287, 293, 295–8
disconﬁrmation reasoning 36–8, 40–2,
44–6, 48, 52–3, 63, 73, 83, 85, 87, 89,
187–9, 334, 338
DNA 288–90, 299, 346

Dobzhansky, Theodosius 288
Duhem, Pierre 42–8, 52–3, 222, 334, 342
dunamis 223
eccentric 108–9, 111–18, 121, 131, 160
eigenvalue 343
eigenvector 343
Einstein, Albert 2–3, 36–7, 39, 52, 66–7,
170, 184, 187, 191, 193, 197–8, 206,
210–14, 216, 218, 257, 263–9, 271,
273–4, 276, 282–5, 340–1
Einstein locality see locality, Einstein
Einstein’s ﬁeld equations 213
Einstein’s realism 263–5, 267
electricity 48–9, 181–3, 333
electromagnetic radiation 187–9
electromagnetic theory 182–4, 197
electron detector 233, 236–7
electron gun 232, 234–7
ellipse 130, 213, 217
elliptical orbit 13, 32, 93, 126, 130–1,
136–7, 140, 153–7, 217–18, 270, 337
epicycles 68–70, 107–8, 120–2, 125–6,
131, 140, 145, 268, 270
major 111–12, 118
minor 111–12
epistemology 18–19, 26, 59
EPR thought experiment 272–80, 344
EPR/Bell/Aspect trilogy 272
equant point 108, 112–15, 117–18,
120–3, 131
equinox 94
essential natures 8, 11–12, 15, 33, 79–80,
102, 143, 156, 167, 227
essentialism 77, 79, 80, 153–7, 167–8,
201, 320
ether (Aristotelian element) 8, 33, 76, 79,
102–4, 141–3, 156, 257
ether (medium for light transmission)
156, 185–6
ethics 8, 300, 307–10, 326, 347
ethics, normative 308–9
evolution xix, 286–319, 326, 345–7
facts, empirical vs. philosophical/concep­
tual 3–5, 31–6, 50, 73, 92, 106,
117–18, 123, 137, 162, 191, 193, 201,
321, 323, 333
falsiﬁability 3, 5, 60–5, 70, 73, 149–52,
335, 338
falsiﬁcationist approach 51–2

Index

Faraday, Michael 183
Feyerabend, Paul 222, 341–2
ﬁeld lines 215–16
ﬁrst law of motion (Newton) 99, 165
ﬁrst law of planetary motion (Kepler) 130
ﬁrst principles 49–50
Fisher, R. A. 346
ﬁxed stars 76, 94–6, 108–10, 115, 119,
125, 155, 159
Flat Earth Society 21, 61
form of the Good (Plato) 121–2
forms (Plato) 121
founder effects see genetic drift
frames of reference 211–12
Franklin, Benjamin 183
Franklin, Rosalind 346
Galileo 81, 100, 136–54, 159, 165, 169,
220, 306, 325, 335, 338
Galvani, Luigi 181
Geocentric Society 21
gene ﬂow (gene migration) 289, 291
genes 288–9, 299
genetic drift 289–91
bottleneck effects 291–2
founder effects 291
genetic mutation 289–90
genetics 182, 288, 293, 346
genome 289
geodesic 216–17
Goodman, Nelson 59–60, 335, 339
gravity 13, 67, 78, 164, 166–70, 183, 210,
212, 217–18, 230, 270, 319, 322–3, 339
grue 59–60, 335
guidance wave (pilot wave) 265–6, 347
Haught, John 302–6
Hempel, Carl 57–8, 335, 339
Herbert, Nick 276, 342, 344
heresy 153, 161
heritable variations 287, 289, 293, 295–9
hidden variables 264–7
hierarchical outlook 168
Hilbert space 342–3
Hume, David 54–60, 334, 347
hypothetico-deductive method 52–3
imaginary numbers see numbers, imaginary
incommensurability 2, 219–29, 341–2
different worlds 226–7
methodology 224–8

terminological 222–4
Index of forbidden books 137
inductive reasoning 37–9, 42, 46, 50, 53–60
inertia 99, 157, 162, 167, 225, 270
inertial frames 211–12
inﬁnite universe 76, 148, 155–6, 160–2, 168
informational locality see locality,
informational
instrumentalism 3, 5, 66–71, 73, 120, 124,
136, 139, 148–9, 168, 170, 217–18,
228–9, 241–2, 252–3, 255, 258, 266,
268, 270, 322, 335, 339
interpretations of quantum theory 230–4,
240–1, 247–8, 253, 255–6, 258–72,
342, 344
collapse interpretations 258–63, 344
non-collapse interpretations 258,
263–8, 344
invariant properties 206–9
irrational numbers see numbers, irrational
Islam 12, 80, 103, 167
jigsaw puzzle 7, 9–15, 20–1, 28, 33, 44, 64,
89, 91, 88–100, 103–4, 142, 155–7,
164, 166–7, 224, 306, 320–3, 332
Judaic 12, 80, 103, 167
Kelvin, Lord 184, 187, 189
Kepler, Johannes 92, 93, 116, 125,
128–37, 145, 148, 153–5, 157, 169–73,
175–8, 270, 331
Kepler’s laws of planetary motion 130–1,
136, 172–3, 175–8
Kuhn, Thomas 135, 222–4, 226, 329–30,
332, 334, 336–9, 341
Lamarckian evolution 299
Lavoisier, Antoine 180
laws of motion 100, 164–6, 170–2, 182, 257
laws of nature 171–2
Leibniz, Gottfried 164, 169, 340
length contraction 198–206, 210
Leucippus 161
locality 272, 275–6, 278, 280–5, 330,
344–5
causal locality 283–4
Einstein locality 282–5
informational locality 284–5
Lorentz transformations 209, 340–1
Lorentz–Fitzgerald equation 198–200
lunar eclipse 144, 337

359

360

Index

machine metaphor 167–8, 170, 321, 324,
326
magnetism 171, 182–3, 215
Malthus, Thomas 294
many-worlds interpretation 267–70
Mathematical Principles of Natural Phi­
losophy (Principia) 164–6, 168–70,
179, 193, 297–8, 322, 339
mathematics of quantum theory 230–2,
239–48, 251–6, 258–9, 264–72, 280,
342–4
Matthews, Patrick 346
Maxwell, James 183, 197, 340
measurement-dependent reality 261–3
mild 261–2
moderate 261–2
radical 261–3
measurement problem 2, 232, 239,
248–53, 255–61, 263, 265, 269, 271–2
mechanistic view of universe 167, 170,
182, 227, 321–5
mechanistic explanation 77–8
mechanists (biological) 181
Medici family 143, 150, 338
Mendel, Gregor 288, 299
Mermin, David 201, 276, 340
metaphors 10, 121–2, 156, 167, 222, 224,
289, 305, 320–1, 326–7, 348
Michelson–Morley experiment 184–9,
193, 197, 207
micro vs. macro levels 252–8, 260, 262–3,
269, 324–5
Milky Way galaxy 160
Minkowski, Hermann 206–7
minor clouds 184–90
modern synthesis 288
moons of Jupiter 143–4, 166
mountains on the moon 141–2
movement of heavenly bodies 33–5, 68,
79, 92, 99–104, 106, 112–13, 141, 143,
155–6, 167, 201, 225, 323, 325
movement of the moon 95, 143
movement of the planets 95–8, 125, 155
movement of the stars 93–4, 96
movement of the sun 93–5, 129
mutations 289–90
natural places 8, 79, 90–1, 100, 168, 227,
257
natural selection 2, 286–93, 295, 297–9,
301–2, 346

naturalistic fallacy 308–9, 347
Neanderthals 289
Neoplatonism 121–2
nerve ﬁbers 181
Newton, Isaac 13, 81, 100, 158, 164–70,
180, 212, 257, 270, 297–8, 322, 339,
340
Newtonian worldview see worldviews,
Newtonian
No Way Out (movie) 38
non-collapse interpretations see interpre­
tations, non-collapse
numbers
complex 343
imaginary 208–9, 343
irrational 222, 342
rational 209, 222
objectivity 20, 173, 177, 255, 307–9
On the Heavens 3, 81, 90, 101, 225, 336
operators 343
organic chemistry 182
Origin of Species 289, 297–9, 319, 346
ought from is 308–9
oxytocin 318
particle effect 234–9
particle mathematics 239
perfect circle fact 32–3, 35, 99, 102–4,
106, 112, 116, 118, 123, 129, 131, 136,
140, 143, 193, 201, 321, 323
perfect solids 132, 134–6
perfection 12, 33, 101–2, 104, 142, 155–6
perihelion of Mercury 213–14, 218
peripheral beliefs 11, 44, 156, 166, 321–3,
332
phases of the moon 95, 144–5
phases of Venus 144–8
photon gun 237, 251, 254
Plato 12, 82, 121–2
playing cards experiment 226–7, 342
polarization 273–4, 276, 279, 282
Popper, Karl 51–2, 334
population genetics 288, 346
potentiality (potency) 100, 224
pre-1600s principle of motion 100, 224
Principia see Mathematical Principles of
Natural Philosophy
principle of equivalence 211–13
principle of general covariance 211–13

Index

principle of inertia 99, 157, 162, 165, 167,
225, 270
principle of relativity 196–200, 211–12
principle of the constancy of the velocity of
light 195, 197, 207, 211
prisoner’s dilemma 310–13, 347
classical 310–11
iterated 310–13, 347
problem of induction 54–7, 59–60, 334–5
process philosophy 302, 304
process theology 302, 304–5
projectible predicates 59–60
projection postulate (collapse postu­
late) 247, 252, 258, 270
Protestant reformation 139, 347
Ptolemaic system 69–70, 92, 104, 106–18,
120–2, 124–6, 129, 131, 143, 145–8,
150, 154, 268, 270, 337
Ptolemy, Claudius 68–70, 81–92, 95, 104,
106–8, 111–16, 118, 120, 122–3, 331,
336–7
Pythagorean theorem 121, 186, 222
quantum entities 230–3, 235–9, 248,
256–8, 260–2, 264–6, 269–70
quantum facts 230–2, 235–9, 247, 263,
266, 268, 271–3, 324, 342
quantum theory 2–4, 70, 184, 188–91,
218, 230–86, 292, 318, 321, 324–5,
342–5
quasars 57–8, 345
Quine, Willard 42–8, 52–3, 332, 334, 339
Quine–Duhem thesis 42–53, 334
radioactivity 189–90, 253
raven paradox 54, 57–8, 60, 335
real numbers see numbers, real
realism 2–3, 5, 66–71, 73, 120, 241,
124–5, 128, 148–9, 168–70, 217–18,
253, 255–6, 258, 263–7, 270, 322,
335–6, 339
redshift 214
reference frames 211–12, 214
regularities, exceptionless 172–7
relativism 26, 28, 64
relativity
general theory of relativity 2–4, 36, 39,
52, 66–7, 170, 184, 187, 190–1,
211–19, 230, 266–7, 269, 276, 282,
285–6, 292, 318, 321–5, 341
geometrical approach 206–210

special theory of relativity 3–4, 66, 184,
187, 190–1, 193–213, 218, 230, 257,
266, 276, 282, 285–6, 292, 318, 321–5,
340–1
relativity of simultaneity 198, 200–1,
206–7, 209–10, 213, 218, 266
religious implications of evolution 300–7,
325–6, 347
representational theory of percep­
tion 22–5, 28
representations, accuracy of 23–5
restriction enzymes 346
retrograde motion 97, 106, 109–112,
117–19, 120–1, 125
rings of Saturn 142–3
Ruse, Michael 307–9, 330–1, 347
salvation 151–2, 303
Schrödinger’s cat 253–5, 261–3, 265,
267–8
Schrödinger’s equation 247, 250–2,
256–7, 259, 267–8
scientiﬁc law 13, 99–100, 130–1, 136,
165, 170–8, 183, 319, 339, 348
scientiﬁc method 3, 42, 43, 47–53, 334
scientiﬁc progress 227–9
scripture 21, 63–5, 127, 138–9, 149–51,
338
second law of motion (Newton) 165
second law of planetary motion
(Kepler) 130–1, 136, 172–3,
175–8
solar eclipse 36, 39, 52, 66, 214, 216
spacetime 200–9, 213–18, 322–3, 341
spacetime interval 206–9
species 79, 82, 286–9, 292–9, 301–5, 316,
319, 325, 346
speed of light 184, 195–7, 204, 207, 216,
281–2
spooky action at a distance 281–2, 285
standard interpretation see Copenhagen
interpretation
starlight, bending of 36, 39, 52, 214, 216,
218, 334
static attributes 260
stellar parallax 84, 88–90, 139, 155, 160
struggle for existence 294–8
subjectivity 255, 263, 307–8
sublunar region 8, 12, 76, 102, 142, 156,
257
summer solstice 94, 118

361

362

Index

sunspots 142
superlunar region 8, 12, 76, 102, 142, 185,
257
superposition 251–5, 262–5, 267–8, 270,
274
syllogism 49
teleological explanation 77–8
teleology 77–80, 155–7, 167–8, 210, 227,
293, 320
telescope 12, 70, 76, 95–6, 116, 124,
126–8, 136–54, 159, 325, 338
The Matrix (movie) 25, 28
third law of motion (Newton) 165
third law of planetary motion
(Kepler) 136
thought experiment 253–4, 265, 272–3,
276
tides 149, 169
time dilation 198–210
Total Recall (movie) 24
Total Recall scenario 23–6, 28–9
trust game 316–18, 347
truth, theories of 17–30, 71, 333
coherence theories 19–22, 26–28, 71
correspondence theories 19–20,
22–26, 71
twin state 273–4, 278–9
two slit experiment 233–6
Tycho 92, 95, 125–9, 132, 135, 330
Tychonic system 92, 95, 125–9, 140,
147–8, 150, 154, 337–8
ultimatum game 313–15, 317, 347
underdetermination 44, 46–7, 53, 148
uniform motion 32–5, 99, 102, 104, 106,
110, 112–13, 116, 118, 120–3, 129–31,
136–7, 140, 155–6, 193, 201, 209, 211,
257, 321–3, 341

universal gravitation
270

164–6, 171–2, 257,

variation (biological) 287–9, 291, 293–9
vector space 343
vectors 342–3
vitalism 182
Volta, Alessandro 181
Wallace, Alfred Russel 2, 286–9, 292–7,
299–300, 346
waves 184–5, 231, 233–46, 251, 254, 265,
267, 271
gravitational waves 2, 216–17
wave effect 234–8
wave equation 242–3
wave function 244–7, 251–2, 256,
258–9, 261–4, 267–9
wave interference 234, 237–8
wave mathematics 239–47
weight 104, 180, 220
Aristotle’s concept of 220–1, 223
Newtonian concept of 220–1, 223
Weinberg, Stephen 301, 332, 347
Whitehead, Alfred North 304
Wilson, E. O. 301, 307, 346–7
winter solstice 94
Wohler, Friedrich 182
worldviews 3, 5, 7–16, 20, 43–4, 50, 63–4,
73, 191, 320–7, 332, 338, 340, 348
Aristotelian 3–5, 7, 12–13, 15, 17,
47–8, 73, 75–81, 88, 90–1, 100, 106,
131, 141–3, 154–9, 164, 166–8, 170,
179, 185, 193, 320–1, 326, 336, 338
Newtonian 3–5, 12–15, 71, 73, 75, 91,
106, 164–70, 179, 181–2, 184, 188,
217–18, 320–2, 324, 326, 333, 336, 339
X-rays 189

